In class 7 and 8 you learnt about the image formation in plane mirrors.
You also discussed about the spherical mirrors. You know that why the
curved surfaces are known as spherical mirrors.
You might have got many doubts while observing your image in
bulged surfaces.
• Is the image formed by a bulged surface same as the image formed
by a plane mirror?
• Is the mirror used in automobiles a plane mirror? Why it is showing
small images?
• Why does our image appear thin or bulged out in some mirrors?
• Can we see inverted image in any mirror?
• Can we focus sun light at a point using a mirror instead of magnifying
Glass?
• Are the angle of reflection and angle of incidence also equal for
reflection by curved surfaces?
Let us discuss about the reflection of light by spherical mirrors in this
lesson to get clarity for the above questions.
Reflection of light at
curved surfaces
1
Chapter
SCERT TELANGANA
2 X Class Reflection of light at curved surfaces
fig-1(a) fig-1(b) fig-1(c)
Reflection of light by spherical mirrors
The first law of reflection tells us;
A light ray incident at an angle with the normal at the point of incidence
will get reflected making equal angle with the normal.
This law is true for all surfaces, be it a plane surface or a curved one.
The important words here are ‘the angle made with normal at the point of
incidence’. If for any surface one can decide the normal and find the incident
angle, it is possible to deduce the angle made by the reflected ray. It is very
easy to find a normal at any point on the plane surface but for a curved or
uneven surface it is not straight forward.
Activity 1
Finding the normal to a curved surface
Take a small piece of thin foam or rubber (like the sole of a slipper).
Put some pins along a straight line on the foam as shown in the figure -1a.
All these pins are perpendicular to the plane of foam. If the foam is
considered as a mirror, each pin would represent the normal at that point.
Any ray incident at the point where the pin makes contact with the surface
will reflect with the same angle as the incident ray made with the pinnormal.
Now bend the foam piece inwards as shown in figure-1b, what happens
to the pins?
They still represent the normal at various points, but you will notice
that all the pins tend to converge at a point (or intersect at a point).
If we bend the foam piece outwards, we will see that the pins seem to
move away from each other or in other words they diverge as shown in
figure-1c.
This gives us an idea of what is likely to happen with a spherical mirror.
A concave mirror will be like the rubber sole bent inwards (fig-1b) and the
convex mirror will be like the rubber sole bent out wards (fig-1c).
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 3
For a concave mirror, like these pins in figure-1b, all normals will
converge towards a point. This point is called centre of curvature(C) of
the mirror.
This gives us a clue about how we can find normal to any point on a
spherical mirror. All that we have to do is to draw a
line from the point on the mirror to centre of the
sphere.
It is much easier to imagine this in a two
dimensional figure as shown in figure-2a. The
concave mirror is actually a part of a big sphere. In
order to find this centre point (centre of curvature)
we have to think of the centre of the sphere to which
the concave mirror belongs. The line drawn from
C to any point on the mirror gives the normal at
that point.
For the ray R, the incident angle is the angle it
makes with the normal shown as i and the reflected
angle is shown as r in figure-2b. We know by first
law of reflection i = r.
The mid point (Geometrical centre) of the mirror is called pole (P) of
the mirror. The horizontal line shown in the figures which passes through
the centre of curvature and pole is called principal axis of the mirror. The
distance between P and C is radius of curvature (R) of the mirror.
Try to construct different reflected rays for any array of rays that are
parallel to the principal axis as shown in figure 2(b). What is your
conclusion?
Verifying your drawing with experiment:
To verify this we must first find out some way of obtaining a beam of
parallel rays. How do we do that?
First we need to create a situation in which one gets parallel rays of
light.
Recall a little bit of geometry: while learning about circles
and tangents, you may have learnt that a radius is always
perpendicular to the tangent to the circle drawn at the point.
P C
Normal
(pole)
principal axis
fig-2(a)
P C
i
R
fig-2(b)
r
SCERT TELANGANA
4 X Class Reflection of light at curved surfaces
fig-4
P F C
In the figure-3 we have stuck two pins on a thermocole block. The
pins are parallel to each other. As we see in the figure, when a source of
light is kept very near, we see the shadows diverging
(from the base of the pins). As we move the source
away from the pins, the angle of divergence gets
reduced. If we move the source far away we will
get parallel shadows. But as we move the candle
away, the light intensity becomes low. That means
to get a beam of parallel rays the source should be
at a long distance and it must be of sufficient intensity.
Where do we find one such source?
Yes, we have one easily available source, you probably have guessed
it: The Sun.
Let us do an experiment with sun rays and a concave mirror.
Activity 2
Hold a concave mirror such that sunlight falls on it. Take a small paper
and slowly move it in front of the mirror and find out the point where you
get the smallest and brightest spot, which will be the image of the sun.
(See to it that your paper is small so that it does not obstruct the incoming
sun rays.)
The rays coming from the sun parallel to the
principal axis of concave mirror converge to a point
(see figure-4). This point is called Focus or focal
point (F) of the concave mirror. Measure the
distance of this spot from the pole of the mirror. This
distance is the focal length (f) of the mirror. The
radius of curvature will be twice this distance (R=2f).
Does this help you to verify the conclusions you arrived at, with your
drawing?
• What happens if you hold the paper at a distance shorter than the focal
length from the mirror and move it away?
• Does the image of the sun become smaller or bigger?
You will notice that the image of the sun first keeps on becoming small,
beyond the focal point it keeps on becoming enlarged.
Note: while drawing a ray diagram sometimes it is not clear which is
the reflecting side of the mirror. Hence we follow a convention of showing
lines on the non-reflecting side(coated side).
fig-3
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 5
Can you draw the same diagram for a convex
mirror?
See figure-5 The parallel rays appear to diverge
after reflection. If we extend the reflected rays
backwards they meet at ‘F’ i.e. focus of the convex
mirror.
When parallel rays are incident on a concave mirror, on reflection they
meet at the focus.
• Do we get an image with a concave mirror at the focus every time? Let
us find out.
Aim: Observing the types of images and measuring the object distance
and image distance from the mirror.
Material required: A candle, paper, concave mirror (known focal
length), V-stand, measuring tape or meter scale.
Procedure: Place the concave mirror on V-stand, arrange a candle and
meter scale as shown in figure-6.
Keep the candle at different distances from the mirror (10cm to 80cm)
along the axis and by moving the paper (screen) find the position where
you get the sharp image on paper. (Take care that flame is above the axis of
mirror, paper is below the axis).
Think and discuss
• See figure-5. A set of parallel rays are falling on a convex mirror. What
conclusions can you draw from this?
• Will you get a point image if you place a paper at the focal point?
Lab Activity
fig-6
fig-5
C F P
SCERT TELANGANA
6 X Class Reflection of light at curved surfaces
Note down your observations in table-1.
Table-1
Group your observations based on the type of image you see (e.g. Image
is bigger and inverted). It is possible you may not get any image at some
positions, note down that too!
Since we know the focal point and centre of curvature, we can reclassify
our above observations as shown in table-2. What do you infer from this
table?.
At this point we suggest that you make one more observation. You
have been trying to get the image on a paper when the object is at different
positions. At the same time also look into the mirror and note your
observations about how the image appears.
• Is it inverted or erect, enlarged or diminished?
Table - 2
What do you infer from the table-2?
Let us try to draw ray diagrams with concave mirrors and compare
them with your inferences.
Ray diagrams for concave mirror
In activity-5 we saw the ray diagram of sunrays parallel to the concave
mirror and the image of the sun was very small at the focal point (See
Distance of candle
from mirror
(object distance-u)
Distance of paper
from mirror
(image distance-v)
Enlarged/
diminished
Inverted or
erect
1
2
3
4
Position of the
candle (object)
Enlarged/
diminished
Inverted or
erect
Position of
the image
Between mirror & F
At focal point
Between F and C
At centre of curvature
Beyond C
Real or
virtual
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 7
figure-4). Now we shall develop a technique to draw ray diagrams when
an object is placed anywhere on the axis of the mirror and validate the
above observations.
Here we will take at least two rays originating from the same point on
the object but with different direction, see how they get reflected from the
mirror and find out the point where they meet to form the image.
Let us take an example.
As shown in the figure-7, assume a concave mirror
and a candle placed at some distance along the axis of the
mirror.
The diagram shows two rays coming from the tip of
the flame (object). The reflected rays are constructed
based on the laws of reflection.They meet at point A. The
tip of the flame of the reflected image will be at the point
of intersection, A.
• Why only at point A?
If we hold the screen at any point before or beyond point A (for example
at point B), we see that the rays will meet the screen at different points.
Therefore, the image of the tip of the flame will be formed at different
points due to these rays. If we draw more rays emanating from the same tip
we will see that at point A they will meet but at point B they won’t. So, the
image of the tip of the flame will be sharp if we hold the screen at point A
and will become blurred (due to overlaping of multiple images) when we
move the paper slightly in any direction (forward or backward). Is this not
something that you observed during the previous experiment with sun rays?
However, it is not going to be easy to evaluate the angle of reflection
for any arbitrary ray, every time we will have to find the normal, measure
the incident angle and construct a ray with equal angle on the other side.
This would be a tedious task, can we find any other simpler method?
Yes, there are a few. Based on our discussion so far, we can identify
some appropriate rays which we can take as representative rays to find the
point ‘A’.
We have seen that all rays that are parallel to the
axis get reflected such that they pass through the focal
point of the mirror. So, for drawing any diagram the
most suitable ray to draw will be the one that comes
from the object and goes parallel to the axis of the
mirror. The reflected ray will be the line drawn from
the point of incidence on the mirror and passes through
A
B
fig-7
F C
R1
fig-8
SCERT
P
TELANGANA
8 X Class Reflection of light at curved surfaces
the focal point of the mirror. To make it more convenient we will always
take rays that come from the tip of the object. See the ray R1
 in figure-8.
The converse situation of previous one is also true; that is, a ray that
passes through the focal point of the mirror will
travel parallel to the axis after reflection.
This gives us our second ray. This will be the
ray coming from the tip of the flame and going
through the focal point and falling on the mirror.
After reflection, this ray travels parallel to the axis.
So we draw the reflected ray as a line parallel to
the axis coming from the point where the incident
ray meets the mirror. See R2
 in figure-9.
Using the rays R1
, R2
 and finding the point where they intersect we
know the point where the image of the tip is formed.
There is one more ray which is convenient to draw.
We have seen earlier that any ray that is normal to the surface, on
reflection, will travel along the same path but in the opposite direction.
Which ray can such a one be for a spherical mirror?
We know that a line drawn from the centre of
curvature to the mirror is perpendicular to the tangent
at the point where the line meets the curve. So if we
draw a ray coming from the tip of the object going
through the centre of curvature to meet the mirror, it
will get reflected along the same line. This ray is shown
as R3
 in the figure-10. In general, a ray travelling along
normal retraces its path.
Along with these three rays ‘the ray which comes from the object and
reaches the pole of the mirror’ is also useful in drawing ray diagrams. For
this ray, the principal axis is the normal.
If we have our object (candle) placed as shown in figure-11, we can
draw the ray diagram to get the
point of intersection A, of any
two rays coming from the top of
the object and point of
intersection B, of any two rays
coming from the bottom of the
object. We notice that point B is
fig-9
F C
R2
P
fig-10
R3
P F C
R1
R B 2
P
fig-11
F
A
C
R1
R
SCERT
2
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 9
exactly at the same distance from mirror as point A. Hence the image is
vertical and inverted.
• Where is the base of the candle expected to be in the image when the
candle is placed on the axis of the mirror?
Since any ray coming from any point on the axis and travelling along
the axis will get reflected on the axis itself, we can conclude that the base
of the image is going to be on the axis. Using the knowledge, that if the
object is placed vertically on the axis, the image is going to be vertical, all
that we need to do, is to draw a perpendicular from point A to the axis. The
intersection point is the point where the base of the image of the candle is
likely to be formed. See figure-12. Hence, as shown in the diagram the
image will be inverted and diminished.
Figure-12 is drawn for the case where the object
is placed beyond the centre of curvature.
Does this conclusion match with your
observations? (Lab Activity)
Draw similar diagrams for other cases and verify
that they match with your observations.
• During the experiment, did you get any positions
where you could not get an image on the screen?
Consider the case shown in the figure-13. The
candle object (O) is placed at a distance less than the
focal length of the mirror.
The first ray (R1
) will start from tip of the object
and run parallel to axis to get reflected so as to pass
through the focal point. This one is easy to draw. The
second ray that we chose for earlier ray diagrams is
the ray coming from the tip of the object and going through the focal point
but it is not possible as such a ray will not meet the mirror. So we must use
the third ray, a ray coming from the tip of the object and going through the
centre of curvature.
But that to does not seem to be possible. So we make a small change.
Instead of drawing a ray from the candle tip to centre of curvature,
we consider a ray that comes from the tip and goes in such a direction
that it would go through the centre of curvature if extended backwards.
This ray is normal to the surface and so will be reflected along the same
line in opposite direction and will go through centre of curvature.
fig-12
R1
R2
F C
P
A
fig-13
R1
OP F C
SCERT TELANGANA
10 X Class Reflection of light at curved surfaces
We notice that the two reflected rays (figure-13) diverge and will not
meet. While doing the experiments for a case such as this we were unable
to find any place where we get a sharp image on the screen. This ray diagram
tells us that since the reflected rays are diverging we will not get an image
anywhere. So even if we had moved the screen much away from the mirror,
we would not have found an image.
In such situations, however, we do see an image when we look in the
mirror. Is it possible to explain this image with a ray diagram?
Remember what we did to find the image in a plane mirror. To decide
the position of image we extended the reflected rays backwards till they
meet. We will do the same here. When we look in the mirror we are looking
at these diverging reflected rays. They appear to be coming from one point.
We can get this point by extending the rays backwards as shown in figure14. The image does not really exist the way we see in other cases, but it is
visible to us.
As seen in the figure-14, the image will be
erect and enlarged. Does this match with your
observations?
This image that we get by extending the rays
backwards is called a virtual image. We cannot
get this on a screen like a real image.
The case in which the object is at the centre
of curvature is another interesting situation. See
figure-15.
From the ray diagram (figure-15) we
conclude that the image of the object will be
formed at the same distance as the object and it
will be inverted and of the same size. What is
your observation?
From the ray diagrams and the observations you may have noticed some
peculiar properties of concave mirrors. They enlarge the image when the
object is held close to the mirror (less than the focal length). Also, the
image is erect. This property is used at many places and most commonly
in shaving mirrors and mirrors used by dentists