You have learnt about electron configuration of elements and periodic
table in previous lessons. It was learnt that there are over 115 elements.
• How do they usually exist?
• Do they exist as a single atom or as a group of atoms?
In Class IX, we saw that several elements like oxygen, nitrogen and
hydrogen exist as diatomic molecules. What is the force that is holding
these constituent atoms together in molecules?
• Are there elements which exist as atoms?
• Why do some elements exist as molecules and some as atoms?
In lower classes you have also learnt about the different laws of
chemical combinations. Since the formation of chemical compounds takes
place as a result of combination of atoms of various elements in different
ways, it raises many questions.
• Why do some elements and compounds react vigorously while others
are inert?
• Why is the chemical formula for water H2
O and for sodium chloride
NaCl, why not HO2
 and NaCl
2
?
• Why do some atoms combine while others do not?
We will try to answer such questions in this chapter.
• Are elements and compounds simply made up of separate atoms
individually arranged?
• Is there any attraction between atoms?
Let us take the example of common salt, NaCl. When you shake salt
from a shaker does it separate into sodium and chlorine? No! This shows
that the sodium and chlorine atoms are being held together.
• What is that holding them together?
Chemical Bonding
8
Chapter
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 151
By the late 19th century and early twentieth century, scientists knew
about three types of forces – gravitational, magnetic and electrostatic.
They also knew about the existence of electrons and protons. So it was
believed that electrostatic forces were the cause of attraction between
atoms in a molecule. When two atoms come sufficiently close together,
the electrons of each atom experience the attractive force of the nucleus
of the other atom. But the electrons which are negatively charged and repel
each other, and the positively charged nuclei also repel each other. The
strength of attraction or repulsion will decide bond formation. If attraction
is more than the repulsion then atoms combine. If repulsion is more than
attraction then the atoms do not combine. The nucleus and the electrons
in the inner shell remain unaffected when atoms come close together. But
the electrons in the outermost shell (valence shell) of atoms get affected.
It was seen that the metal part of the compound
migrated towards the negative electrode and the
non-metal part towards the positive electrode. So
it was proposed that metals are responsible for
positively charged particles and non-metals are
responsible for negatively charged particles. The
oppositely charged particles are held together by
electrostatic forces in a compound. Do you agree with this explanation? Why?
While this explanation could explain bonding in NaCl, KCl etc. it could not explain
bonding in carbon compounds or diatomic molecules of elements.
A Votaic pile
Davy’s experiment –
Humphry Davy (1778-1819),
a professor of chemistry at the
Royal Institution in London,
constructed a battery of over 250
metallic plates. In 1807, using
electricity from this battery, he
was able to extract highly reactive
metals like potassium and sodium
by electrolysis of fused salts.
Experimental set up by Davy
Do you know?
SCERT TELANGANA
152 X Class Chemical Bonding
Electrons in valence shell (valence electrons) are responsible for the
formation of bonds between atoms.
In previous lessons you studied about exothermic and endothermic
reactions. You also studied about reactivity of elements in periodic table.
Some elements are more reactive and some are less reactive;
• Why there is absorption of energy in certain chemical reactions and
release of energy in other reactions?
• Where the absorbed energy goes?
• Is there any relation to energy and bond formation between atoms?
• What could be the reason for the change in reactivity of elements?
Lewis symbols (or) Lewis dot structures:
Periodic Classification and arrangement of elements in the periodic
table according to the electron configuration gave a new thought about
chemical bond.
The discovery of noble gases and the understanding of their electronic
configurations helped us in explaining the formation of chemical bonds
among the atoms of the elements. Noble gases which belong to zero group
(18th group or VIII A) are typical gases with almost negligible chemical
activity when compared to other elements. They undergo few or no chemical
changes. They are more stable and do not form molecules by allowing
their atoms to combine among themselves or with the atoms of other
elements.
• What could be the reason for this?
Let us investigate.
Consult the periodic table given in the previous chapter and observe
the following table:
Table-1
Look at the second column and third column. It is clear that all the
noble gases have eight electrons in the outermost shell, except
Helium (He).
Element Z Electronic configuration Valence elctrons
K L MN
Helium (He) 2 2 2
Neon (Ne) 10 2 8 8
Argon(Ar) 18 2 8 8 8
Krypton(Kr) 36 2 8 18 8 8
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 153
The arrangement of electrons in different shells of atoms (electronic
configuration) of 18th group elements is shown in the table-1. The valence
electrons in the atom of an element is depicted in a short form by Lewis
symbol or electron dot structure. We represent the nucleus and inner shell
electrons of the atom by the symbol of the element and electrons in the
outer shell by dots or cross marks.
Let us see how? Lewis dot structure of argon and sodium atoms are
written.
Let us start with argon. Its atom has eight valence electrons.
First write the symbol of element argon. Ar
Place the valence electrons around the symbol. Put two dots at a time
on each of the four sides of the symbol of the element till all are used up.
So, we get,
Similarly, for sodium, the number of valence electrons in sodium is
one and the symbol is Na. We can also use cross mark for the electrons.
The Lewis structure for sodium atom is therefore:
The Lewis dot structures of the atoms of noble gases are shown below:
Activity 1
Write the Lewis structures of the given elements in the table. Also
consult the periodic table and fill in the group number of the element.
Table – 2:
: Ar :
: : Nax
He:
: Ne :
: :
: Rn :
: :
Element Hydrogen Helium Beryllium Boron Carbon Nitrogen oxygen
Group 1
number
Valence 1
electron
Lewis dot H.
structure
: Ar :
: :
: Xe :
: :
: Kr :
: :
SCERT TELANGANA
154 X Class Chemical Bonding
Look at the periodic table. Do you see any relation between the number
of valence electrons and group numbers? We find that for groups 1-2 and
13 –18, we can use the periodic table to find the number of valence
electrons. Group1 has one outer electron, group 2 has two, and group 13
has three, group 14 has four and so on.
• What did you notice in Lewis dot structure of noble gases and
electronic configurations of the atoms of these elements shown in
table - 2.
It was found that the elements which participate in chemical reactions
get octet or ns2
 np6
 configuration similar to that of noble gas elements. It
is to be noted that octet rule is still a rule not the law, because there are
considerable exceptions for this rule.
Electronic theory of valence by Lewis and Kossel
There were number of attempts to explain the chemical bond formation
between atoms in terms of electrons but a satisfactory explanation for
this concept was given by Kossel and Lewis in 1916. They gave this concept
independently. The basis for their theory was valence in terms of electrons.
They provided logical explanation of valence on the basis of the lack of
chemical activity of noble gases which led to the proposal of octet rule.
Observe the practical behaviour of atoms of main group elements
(Group IA, IIA, IIIA, IVA, VA, VIA, VIIA and zero or VIIIA group elements).
When they are allowed to undergo chemical changes, they try to get octet
electronic configuration in the outer shells.
Let us understand this with the following illustrations.
Group IA elements (Li to Cs) try to lose one valence shell electron
from their atoms to form corresponding uni-positive ions which get octet
in their outer shells.
Example: 11Na J 2, 8, 1 ; 11Na+ J 2, 8
Group IIA elements (Mg to Ba) try to lose two valence electrons from
their atoms during chemical changes and form di– positive ions with the
octet in the outer shells.
Example: 12Mg J 2, 8, 2 ; 12Mg2+ J 2, 8
Group IIIA elements try to lose three valence electrons from their
atoms and form corresponding tri positive ions with octates in the outer
SCERT
shells.
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 155
Example: 13Al J 2, 8, 3 ; 13Al3+ J 2, 8
Group VIA elements try to gain two electrons into the valence shells
of their atoms during the chemical changes and form corresponding di
negative anions which get octet in their outer shells.
Example: 8
O J 2, 6 ; 8
O2– J 2, 8
Group VIIA elements try to gain one electron into the valence shells
of their atoms during the chemical changes and form corresponding
uni– anions which get octet in their outer shells.
Example: 9
F J 2, 7 ; 9
F– J 2, 8
Group VIIIA elements, the noble gases do not try to lose or gain
electrons. Generally, helium and neon do not participate in chemical
changes. Even other elements of VIIIA do not gain or lose electrons from
their atoms when they participate in a very few chemical changes.
Example: 10Ne J 2, 8 ; No electron gain or loss from the neon
atom.
• What have you observed from the above conclusions about the main
groups?
• Why do atoms of elements try to combine and form molecules?
Noble gases of VIII A possess eight electrons in the valence shells of
their atoms. Helium is an exception. Its atom has only two electrons, but
its only shell is completely filled. Noble gases with eight electrons in the
valence shell in their atoms are highly stable and rarely participate in
chemical changes. Therefore it is concluded that any species (atom or
ion) with eight electrons in the valence shell is stable.
VA VIA VIIA
NOF
PSCl
As Se Br
Sb Te I
Bi Po At
IA IIA IIIA
Na Mg Al
K Ca Ga
Rb Sr In
Cs Ba Tl
Fr Ra
VIIIA
Ne
Ar
Kr
Xe
Ra
–3 –2 –1
Magic
octet
Gain Electrons Lose Electrons
+1 +2 +3
Non metals Noble gases Metals
Net charge on
the species }
SCERT TELANGANA
156 X Class Chemical Bonding
• Is it accidental that IA to VIIA main group elements during chemical
reactions get eight electrons in the outermost shells of their ions,
similar to noble gas atoms?
No. It cannot be simply accidental. Eight electrons in the outermost
shell definitely gives stability to the ion or atom. Based on the above
observations a statement known as “ The Octet Rule” is framed.
Octet rule:
It may be stated as “The atoms of elements tend to undergo chemical
changes that help to leave their atoms with eight outer-shell electrons.”
Lewis depicted the atom in terms of a positively charged kernel (Kernel
is the nucleus and all other electrons in the atom except the outer most
shell electrons) and the outershell that could accommodate a maximum
of eight electrons.
Chemically active elements do not have an octet of electrons in the
valence shell of their atoms. Their reactivity arises from their tendency to
achieve the octet, by forming bonds either with atoms of their own type or
with atoms of other elements.
The force of attraction between any two atoms or a group of atoms
that results a stable entity is called a ‘chemical bond’. There are many
types of chemical bonds, but here we discuss only about ionic bond and
covalent bond.
Ionic and Covalent bonds
A. Ionic bond
Kossel proposed the ionic bond (electrostatic bond) based on the
following facts.
i. Ionic bond is formed between atoms of two dissimilar elements due
to transfer of electrons from the atom of one element to the other.
ii. There are highly reactive metals like alkali metals (IA) and highly
reactive non-metals like halogens (VIIA) on the left side and right side
of the periodic table respectively.
iii. Noble gases except helium have eight electrons in the valence shells
of their atoms. They are chemically inactive and stable.
iv. To attain eight electrons in the outermost shell similar to noble gases
metal atoms that have one two or three electrons in the valence shells
generally lose those electrons and form stable positive ions called
SCERT
cations.
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 157
Do you know?
The number of electrons gained by a non-metal element for its atom is its valency,
which is equal to (8 - its group number).
Ex. The valency of chlorine is (8 – 7) = 1.
Example: 11Na 2, 8, 1 ; Na+ 2, 8
12Mg 2, 8, 2 ; Mg2+ 2, 8
13Al 2, 8, 3 ; Al3+ 2, 8
v. To attain eight electrons in the outermost shell, non-metal atoms that
have 5,6 or 7 valence electrons gain 3,2 or 1 electron respectively and
form negative ions known as anions.
Example: 15P 2, 8, 5 ; P3- 2, 8, 8
16S 2, 8, 6 ; S2- 2, 8, 8
17Cl 2, 8, 7 ; Cl
-
 2, 8, 8
Formation of ionic bond
The positive ions (cations) and negative ions (anions) that are formed
due to the transfer of electrons from the metal atoms to the non-metal
atoms experience the electrostatic forces and get attracted to form
chemical bond. As this bond is between charged particles known as
ions, it is called ionic bond. Sometimes based on the forces being
electrostatic, the bond is also called the electrostatic bond. As the
valence concept has been explained in terms of electrons, it is also
called the electrovalent bond.
Thus, we can define ionic bond as follows:
The electrostatic attractive force that keeps cation and anion (which
are formed from metal atoms and non-metal atoms due to transfer of
electrons) together to form a new electrically neutral compounds is called
‘ionic bond’.
• Explain the formation of ionic compounds NaCl, MgCl
2
, Na2
O and
AlCl3
 through Lewis electron dot symbols (formulae)
Do you know?
The number of electrons lost from a metal atom is the valence of its element
which is equal to its group number.
Ex. Na and Mg have valence 1 and 2 respectively.
SCERT TELANGANA
158 X Class Chemical Bonding
Eg-1. Formation of sodium chloride (NaCl):
Sodium chloride is formed from the elements sodium and chlorine. It
can be explained as follows:
Na(s) + 1/2 Cl
2(g) J NaCl
(s)
Cation formation
When sodium (Na) atom loses one electron to get octet electron
configuration it forms a cation (Na+) and gets electron configuration that
of Neon (Ne) atom.
11Na (g) J 11Na+
(g) + eE.C. 2, 8, 1 2, 8
or [Ne] 3s1 [Ne]
Anion formation
Chlorine has shortage of one electron to get octet in its valence shell.
So it gains the electron from Na atom to form anion and gets electron
configuration as that of argon (Ar).
 17Cl (g) + e- J Cl
–
(g)
Electronic configuration 2, 8, 7 2, 8, 8
 or [Ne] 3s2 3p5 [Ne] 3s2
 3p6
 or [Ar]
Formation of the compound NaCl from its ions:
Transfer of electrons between ‘Na’ and ‘Cl’ atoms, results in the
formation of ‘Na+’ and ‘Cl
–
’ ions. These oppositely charged ions get
attracted towards each other due to electrostatic forces and form the
compound sodium chloride (NaCl).
Na+
(g) + Cl–
(g) J Na+Cl
–
(s) or NaCl
Eg-2. Formation of magnesium chloride (MgCl
2
):
Magnesium chloride is formed from the elements magnesium and
chlorine. The bond formation MgCl
2
 in brief using chemical equation is as
follows:
Mg(s) + Cl
2(g)
J Mg Cl
2(s)
Cation formation
 12Mg (g) J 12Mg2+
(g) + 2e–
Electronic configuration 2, 8, 2 2, 8
or [Ne] 3s2 [Ne]
Anion formation
 2Cl (g) + 2e– J 2Cl
–
(g)
Electronic configuration 2, 8, 7 2, 8, 8
or [Ne] 3s2 3p5 [Ne] 3s2
 3p6
SCERT
 or [Ar]
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 159
The compound MgCl
2
 formation from its ions:
Mg2+ gets ‘Ne’ configuration and
Each Cl
–
 gets ‘Ar’ configuration
Mg2+
(g) + 2Cl
–
(g) J MgCl
2 (s)
One ‘Mg’ atom transfers two electrons one each to two ‘Cl’ atoms and
so formed Mg2+ and 2Cl
–
 attract to form MgCl
2
.
Eg-3. Formation of di sodium monoxide(Na2
O):
Di sodium monoxide formation can be explained as follows:
Cation formation (Na+ formation):
 2Na (g) J 2Na+
(g) + 2eElectronic configuration 2, 8, 1 2, 8
or [Ne] 3s1 [Ne]
Anion formation (O2–, the oxide formation):
 O (g) + 2e- J O2-
(g)
Electronic configuration 2, 6 2, 8
or [Ne] 2s2 2p4 [He] 2s2
 2p6
 or [Ne]
The compound Na2
O formation from its ions is as shown.
2Na+
(g) + O2-
(g) J Na2
O(s)
Two ‘Na’ atoms transfer one electron each to one oxygen atom to
form 2Na+ and O2-
Each Na+
 gets ‘Ne’ configuration and O2- gets ‘Ne’ configuration.
These ions (2Na+ and O2-) attract to form Na2
O.
Eg-4. Formation of aluminium chloride (AlCl
3
):
Aluminium chloride formation can be explained as follows:
Formation of aluminium ion (Al3+), the cation:
 13Al(g) J Al3+
(g) + 3eElectronic configuration 2, 8, 3 2, 8
or [Ne] 3s2
3p1 [Ne]
Formation of chloride ion (Cl-), the anion:
 3Cl
(g) + 3e- J 3Cl
–
(g)
Electronic configuration 2, 8, 7 2, 8,8
or [Ne] 3s2 3p5 [Ne] 3s2
 3p6
 or [Ar]
Each aluminium atom loses three electrons and three chlorine atoms
SCERT
gain them, one electron each.
TELANGANA
160 X Class Chemical Bonding
The compound AlCl
3
 is formed from its component ions by the
electrostatic forces of attractions.
Al3+
(g) + 3Cl
–
(g) J AlCl
3 (s)
The arrangement of ions in ionic compounds
• How do cations and anions of an ionic compound exist in its solid
state?
• Let us explain this with sodium chloride as our example:
• Do you think that pairs of Na+
 Cl
-
 as units would be present in the solid
crystal?
If you think so, it is not correct. Remember that electrostatic forces
are non directional. Therefore, it is not possible for one Na+ to be attracted
by one Cl
–
 and vice-versa. Depending upon the size and charge of a particular
ion, number of oppositely charged ions get attracted by it, but, in a definite
number. In sodium chloride crystal each Na+
 is surrounded by 6 Cl
-
 and
each Cl
–
 by six Na+
 ions. Ionic compounds in the crystalline state consist
of orderly arranged cations and anions held together by electrostatic forces
of attractions in three dimensions. The crystal structure of sodium chloride
is given below:
NaCl is said to possess face centered cubic lattice crystal
structure (see figure-1).
The number of ions of opposite charge that surround a
given ion of given charge is known as the coordination
number of that given ion.
For example, in sodium chloride crystal, the
coordination number of Na+ is 6 and that of Cl
-
 is also 6.
Factors affecting the formation of cation and anion:
In previous lesson you have learnt about variation of
metallic and non metallic character of elements in a group
or period of the periodic table. Recall the facts about metallic and non
metallic character of elements.
Generally elements of metals have tendency of losing electron to attain
the octet in their valence shell. This property is called as the metallic
character or electropositivity. Elements with more electropositive
character form cations. Similarly non metals like oxygen (8
O), fluorine
(
9
F) and chlorine (17Cl) acquire electron configuration of elements of inert
gases by gaining electrons this property is called the non-metallic
character or electronegativity of the element. Elements with more
electronegative character form anions.
fig-1 Cl
–
Na+
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 161
• Can you explain the reasons for all these?
Ionic bond is formed between atoms of elements with electronegativity
difference equal to or greater than 1.9.
In ionic bond formation, you have noticed that atoms either lose
electrons or gain electrons to attain octet in valence shell. i.e., in an ionic
bond, transfer of electrons takes place between combining atoms.
The tendency of losing electrons to form cations (or) gaining electron
to form anions depends on the following factors:
i. Atomic size
ii. Ionisation potential
iii. Electron affinity
iv. Electronegativity
The atoms of elements with low ionisation energy, low electron affinity
high atomic size and low electronegativity form cations.
The atoms of elements with high ionisation potential, high electron
affinity, small atomic size and high electronegativity form anions.
B. Covalent bond
G.N. Lewis (1916) proposed that atoms of some elements could
achieve an octet in their valence shells without transfer of electrons
between them. They can attain octet configuration in their valence shells
by sharing the valence electrons with one or more atoms.
The electrons shared between two atoms belong to both the atoms and
the sharing of electrons between them leads to the formation of a chemical
bond known as covalent bond.
For example, take two fluorine atoms which form a stable molecule.
Each fluorine atom contributes one electron for bonding and the electron
pair that is formed in this way is mutually shared by both the fluorine
atoms. Each atom in the F2
 molecule has an octet of valence electrons.
SCERT TELANGANA
162 X Class Chemical Bonding
The dots around fluorine atom shows the valence electrons of
respective atoms.
The chemical bond formed between two atoms by mutual sharing of a
pair of valence shell electrons so that both of them can attain octet or
duplet in their valence shell is called the covalent bond.
The prefix co – is used to indicate when things are equal or joined.
(for example, co exist, cooperate etc). Here each atom contributes one
electron from the valence shell for the bonding. Therefore, the name
covalent is given (equal valence electrons contribution) for this bond.
Formation of O2
 molecule
The electronic configuration of 8
O is 2, 6. Oxygen atom has six
electrons in its valence shell. It requires two more electrons to get octet
in its valence shell. Therefore oxygen atoms come close and each oxygen
atom contributes two electrons for bonding. Thus, there exist two covalent
bonds between two oxygen atoms in O2
 molecule as there are two pairs of
electrons shared between them.
We can say that a double bond is formed between two oxygen atoms in
O2
 molecule. Observe the following figures. Both the oxygen atoms have
octet in the valence shell.
• Can you say what type of bond exists between atoms of nitrogen
molecule?
Let us see
Nitrogen (N2
) molecule
The electronic configuration of ‘N’ atom is 2,5 and to have octet in the
valence shell it requires three more electrons. When two nitrogen atoms
approach each other, each atom contributes 3 electrons for bonding. There
are six electrons shared between two nitrogen atoms in the form of three
pairs. Therefore, there is a triple bond between two nitrogen atoms in N2
SCERT
molecule.
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 163
Methane (CH4
) molecule
In the formation of methane, CH4
 molecule, carbon contributes 4
electrons, (one electron to each hydrogen atom) and 4 hydrogen atoms
contribute one electron each. Thus in CH4
 molecule, there are four C – H
covalent bonds as shown below:
Ammonia (NH3
) molecule
In ammonia molecule, three N – H single covalent bonds are present.
Electron configuration of 7
N is 2, 5 and 1
H is 1.
Nitrogen atom contributes three electrons for bonding. Three hydrogen
atoms at the same time contribute one electron each for bonding. Six
electrons form three pairs and each pair is shared between nitrogen and
one hydrogen atom as shown below:
SCERT TELANGANA
164 X Class Chemical Bonding
Water (H2O) molecule
In water molecule (H2O), there are two O – H single covalents bonds.
Electron configuration of 8O is 2,6 and 1H is 1.
Oxygen atom needs ‘2’ electrons to attain octet in its valence shell.
Therefore it shares ‘2’ electron with two hydrogen atoms to form water
(H2O) molecule.
The total number of covalent bonds that an atom of an element forms
is called its ‘covalency’.
The Bond lengths and Bond energies of covalent bonds
Bond length or bond distance is the equilibrium distance between the
nuclei of two atoms which form a covalent bond.
It is generally given in nm (nanometer) or A0
(Angstrom unit).
Bond energy or Bond dissociation energy is the energy needed to break
a covalent bond between two atoms of a diatomic covalent compound in
its gaseous state.
Draw backs of electronic theory of valence
1) When a covalent bond is formed between any two atoms, irrespective
of the nature of the atoms, the bond lengths and bond energies are expected
to be the same. This is because any covalent bond between any two atoms
is a result of mere sharing of two identical electrons. But, practically it
was observed that bond lengths and bond energies are not same when the
atoms that form the bond are different. (See table - 3)
 What do you understand from bond lengths and bond energies?
Do you know?
 An angstrom (A0
) is a unit of length equal to 10-10 metre, or 0.1 nanometre, or
100 picometre.
 1 nanometre = 10-9 metre
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 165
• Are the values not different for the bonds between different types of atoms?
2) The theory could not explain why ClBeCl in BeCl
2
 is 1800
, FBF in
BF3
 is 120o
, HCH in CH4
 is
1090
28/
, HNH in NH3
 is
1070
48/
 and HOH in H2
O is
104o
31/
 etc.
i.e., it fails to explain the
shapes of the molecules.
Valence shell electron
pair repulsion theory
To explain the bond
angles in the molecules with
three or more than three
atoms with all atoms
attached to a central atom
through covalent bonds a
theory called the valence –
shell – electron – pair
repulsion – theory
(VSEPRT) was proposed by Sidgwick and Powell (1940). It was further
improved by Gillespie and Nyholm (1957).
This theory suggests the following points.
1. VSEPRT considers electrons in the valence shells which are in covalent
bonds and in lone pairs as charge clouds that repel one another and
stay as far apart as possible. This is the reason why molecules get
specific shapes.
2. If we know the total number of electron pairs in the valence shell as
covalent bonds and lone pairs in the central atom, it will help us to
predict the arrangement of those pairs around the nucleus of the central
atom and from that the shape of the molecule.
3. Lone pairs occupy more space around the central atom than bond pairs.
Lone pair means unshared electron pair or non-bonding electron pair.
These are attracted to only one nucleus where as the bond pair is shared
by two nuclei. Thus, the presence of lone pairs on the central atom
causes slight distortion of the bond angles from the expected regular
shape. If the angle between lone pair and bond pair increases at the
central atom due to more repulsion, the actual bond angles between
atoms must be decreased.
Bond Bond Bond (dissociation)
length (Å0
) energy (KJmol-1)
H –H 0.74 436
F – F 1.44 159
Cl – Cl 1.95 243
Br – Br 2.28 193
I – I 2.68 151
H – F 0.918 570
H – Cl 1.27 432
H – Br 1.42 366
H – I 1.61 298
H – O (of H2
O) 0.96 460
H – N (of NH3
) 1.01 390
H – C (of CH4
) 1.10 410
Table – 3
∧ ∧
∧
∧
∧
SCERT TELANGANA
166 X Class Chemical Bonding
4.i) If two bond pairs are present in two covalent bonds around the
nucleus of the central atom without any lone pairs in the valence shell,
they must be separated by 1800
 to have minimum repulsion between them.
Thus, the molecule would be linear.
Example:
4.ii) If three bond pairs are there in three covalent bonds around the
nucleus of the central atom, without any lone pairs they get separated by
1200
 along three corners of a triangle. Therefore, the shape of the molecule
is trigonal-planar.
Example:
NOTE: Did you notice that in BeCl
2
 and BF3
 the central atoms Be and
B did not possess 8 electrons around them in the valence shell. They have
only 4 and 6 electrons respectively. These molecules are known as electron
deficient molecules.
4.iii) If there are four bond pairs in the valence shell of the central
atom, the four bond pairs will orient along the four corners of a tetrahedron
(three dimensional arrangement) and the bond angle expected is 1090
28/
.Example: Methane.
* In methane molecule (CH4
), HCH is 1090
28/
 because of four electron
pairs (bonding) around carbon, as shown below:
SCERT
∧
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 167
4.iv) If there are three bond pairs and one lone pair i.e., unshared
electron pair, then the lone pair occupies more space around the nucleus
of the central atom. The remaining three bond pairs come relatively closer
as in NH3 molecule.
Example: Ammonia
In ammonia (NH3
) molecule, there are three bond pairs in
covalent bonds (3 N – H) around the nucleus of the nitrogen atom
and one lone pair. Lone pair – bond pair repulsion is greater than
bond pair – bond pair repulsion. Therefore, NH3
 which is expected
to be tetrahedral with four electron pairs in the valence shell and
HNH = 1090
28/
, it has HNH = 1070
48/
 due to the more repulsion by lone
pair on the bond pairs.
The shape of the NH3
 molecule is triagonal pyramidal with N at the
apex of the pyramid.
4.v) If there are two bond pairs and two lone pairs of electrons around
the nucleus of the central atom in its valence shell, lone pair – lone pair
repulsion is greater than lone pair – bond pair repulsion. Therefore, the
angle between bond pairs further decreases.
Example: Water
In water molecule, (H2
O) there are four electron pairs around the
nucleus of oxygen atom, but, two of them are lone pairs and two bond
pairs. Therefore, H2
O molecule gets ‘V’ shape or bent shape or angular
instead of tetrahedral shape as that of CH4
 due to lone pair – lone pair
and lone pair – bond pair repulsions. HOH is 1040
31/
.
• What is the bond angle in a molecule?
It is the angle subtended by two imaginary lines that pass from
the nuclei of two atoms which form the covalent bonds with the
central atom through the nucleus of the central atom at the central
atom. (see figure ‘α’ is the bond angle).
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory (VSEPRT) mainly fails
in explaining the strengths of the bonds. This is because; the theory still
depends on the Lewis concept of covalent bond formation. It could not
say anything extra about the electronic nature of covalent bonds.
107048/
α
∧
∧ ∧
1040
31/
SCERT TELANGANA
168 X Class Chemical Bonding
To describe covalent bonding, a quantum mechanical model called
valence bond theory has been suggested by Linus Pauling (1954).
Valence bond theory
To describe covalent bonding, a quantum mechanical model called
valence bond theory has been suggested by Linus Pauling (1954). It is
explained as follows:
1. A covalent bond between two atoms is formed when the two atoms
approach each other closely and one atom overlaps its valence orbital
containing unpaired electron, the valence orbital of the other atom that
contains the unpaired electron of opposite spin. The so formed paired
electrons in the overlapping orbitals are attracted to the nuclei of both the
atoms. This bonds the two atoms together.
Eg: In the formation of H2
 molecule, the 1s orbital of one ‘H’ atom
containing an unpaired electron overlaps the ‘1s’ orbital of the other ‘H’
atom containing unpaired electron of opposite spin giving H-H bond and
H2
 molecule.
 H atom H atom H2
 molecule
2. The greater the overlapping of the orbitals that form the bond, the
stronger will be the bond. This gives a directional character to the bond
when other than ‘s’ orbitals are involved.
3. Each bonded atom maintains its own atomic orbitals but the electron
pair in the overlapping orbitals is shared by both the atoms involved in the
overlapping.
4. If two atoms form multiple bonds between them the first bond is
due to the overlap of orbitals along the inter-nuclear axis giving a stronger
sigma(σ) bond. After formation of (σ) bond the other bonds are formed
due to the overlap of orbitals side wise or laterally giving weaker π bonds.
The ‘σ’ bond is stronger because the electron pair shared is concentrated
more between the two nuclei due to end-end or head on overlap and
attracted to both the nuclei. The π bond overlap gives a weaker bond due to
the lateral overlap of ‘p’ orbitals which is not to greater extent.
Consider Cl-Cl molecule
17Cl - 1s2
 2s2
 2p6
 3s2
 3px
2
 3py
2 3pz
1
In the formation of Cl
2
 molecule, the 3pz
 orbital of one chlorine
atom containing an unpaired electron overlaps the 3pz
 orbital of other
SCERT
chlorine atom that contains unpaired electron of opposite spin.
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 169
• How is HCl molecule formed?
The ‘1s’ orbital of ‘H’ atom containing unpaired electron overlaps the
‘3p’ orbital of chlorine atom containing unpaired electron of opposite spin.
Formation of N2
 molecule
7
N has electronic configuration 1s2
 2s2
 2px
1
 2py
1 2pz
1
. Suppose that px
orbital of one ‘N’ atom overlaps the ‘px
’ orbital of the other ‘N’ atom giving
σ px - px
 bond along the inter-nuclear axis. The py and pz
 orbitals of one ‘N’
atom overlap the py
 and pz
 orbital of other ‘N’ atom laterally, respectively
perpendicular to inter-nuclear axis giving π py
-py
 and π pz
-pz
 bonds.
Therefore, N2
 molecule has a triple bond between two nitrogen atoms.
Formation of O2 molecule
8
O has electronic configuration 1s2
 2s2
 2px
2
 2py
1 2pz
1
. If the ‘py
‘ orbital
of one ‘O’ atom overlaps the ‘py
’ orbital of other ‘O’ atom along the internuclear axis, a sigma py
- py
 bond (σpy
- py
) is formed. pz
 orbital of one ‘O’
atom overlaps the pz
 orbital of other ‘O’ atom laterally, perpendicular to
the inter-nuclear axis giving a π pz
- pz
 bond. O2
 molecule has a double
bond between two oxygen atoms.
Valence bond theory-Hybridisation
Formation of BeCl
2
 (Beryllium chloride) molecule
4
Be has electronic configuration 1s2
 2s2
. It has no unpaired electrons.
It is expected not to form covalent bonds, but it forms two covalent bonds
one each with two chlorine atoms. To explain this, an excited state is
suggested for Beryllium in which an electron from ‘2s’ shifts to 2px
 level.
Electronic configuration of 4
Be 1s2
 2s1
 2px
1
 and 17Cl 1s2
 2s2
 2p6
 3s2
3px
2
 3py
2
 3pz
1
SCERT TELANGANA
170 X Class Chemical Bonding
If Be forms two covalent bonds with two chlorine atoms, one bond
should be σ2s-3p due to the overlap of ‘2s’ orbital of Be, the ‘3pz
’ orbital
of one chlorine atom and the other bond should be σ2p-3p due to the overlap
of ‘2px
’ orbital of Be atom the 3p orbital of the other chlorine atom. As the
orbitals overlapping are different, the bond strengths of two Be-Cl must
be different. But, both bonds are of same strength and ClBeCl is 1800
. To
explain the discrepancies like this a phenomenon called ‘hybridisation of
atomic orbitals’ was proposed by Linus Pauling (1931).
Hybridisation is a phenomenon of intermixing of atomic orbitals of
almost equal energy which are present in the outer shells of the atom and
their reshuffling or redistribution into the same number of orbitals but
with equal properties like energy and shape.
Be atom in its excited state allows its 2s orbital and 2px
 orbital which
contain unpaired electrons to intermix and redistribute to two identical
orbitals. As per Hund’s rule each orbital gets one electron. The new orbitals
based on the types of orbitals that have undergone hybridisation are called
sp orbitals. The two sp orbitals of Be get separated by 1800
. Now, each
chlorine atom comes with its 3pz
1
 orbital and overlaps it the sp orbitals of
Be forming two identical Be-Cl bonds (σsp-p bonds) . ClBeCl = 1800
.
Both the bonds are of same strength.
Formation of BF3
 molecule
5
B has electronic configuration 1s2
 2s2
 2px
1
.
As it has one unpaired electron (2px
1
) it should form only one covalent
bond to give B-F molecule. But we get practically BF3
 molecule.
To explain this, it is suggested that,
i. Boron (B) first undergoes excitation to get electronic configuration
1s2
 2s1
 2px
1
 2py
1
.
ii. As it forms three identical B-F bonds in BF3
, it is suggested that
excited ‘B’ atom undergoes hybridisation. There is an intermixing of 2s,
2px
, 2py
 orbitals and their redistribution into three identical orbitals called
sp2
 hybrid orbitals. For three sp2
 orbitals to get separated to have minimum
∧
∧
Beryllium Chloride
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 171
repulsion the angle between any two orbitals is 1200
at the central atom and each sp2
 orbital gets one
electron. Now three fluorine atoms overlap their
2pz
 orbitals containing unpaired electrons (F9
 1s2
2s2
 2px
2
 2py
2
 2pz
1
) the three sp2
 orbitals of ‘B’ that
contain unpaired electrons to form three σsp2
-p
bonds.
Formation of NH3
 molecule
One nitrogen atom and three hydrogen atoms are present in one
ammonia molecule. All the three N-H bonds are of same strength and
HNH = 1070
48/
7
N has electronic configuration 1s2
 2s2
 2px
1
 2py
1
 2pz
1
.
If three hydrogen atoms overlap their 1s orbitals on the three ‘p’
orbitals of nitrogen atom, they give identical σ p-s bonds but, then the
HNH should be equal to 900 where as 1070
48/
 . To explain the discrepancy
in the bond angle ‘N’ atom is said to undergo sp3
 hybridisation.
In this process ‘2s’ and 2px
, 2py
, 2pz
 orbitals of nitrogen
intermix and redistribute into four identical sp3
 orbitals. One
of the four sp3
 orbitals get a pair of electrons and the other
three sp3
 orbitals get one electron each. Now hydrogen atoms
overlap their 1s orbitals containing unpaired electrons the sp3
orbitals of ‘N’ atom containing unpaired electrons to give three
σs-sp3
 bonds. HNH should be 1090
 28/
 for sp3
 hybridisation. As there is
a lone pair in one of the sp3
 orbitals, there is a greater lone pair – bond pair
repulsion which decreases the bond angle HNH to 1070
48/
.
Shape of water molecule
It is found that HOH is 1040
31/
 .
The electronic configuration of 8
O is 1s2
 2s2
 2px
2
 2py
1
 2pz
1
 and
1
H is 1s1
.
Therefore, there should be two σ s-p bonds due to the overlap of ‘s’
orbitals of two hydrogen atoms, the ‘p’ orbitals of oxygen atom which
contain unpaired electrons. HOH should be 900
.
But HOH observed is 1040
31/
 . To explain this, sp3
hybridisation is suggested for the valence orbitals of ‘O’ atom.
One s-orbital (2s) and three ‘p’ orbitals (2px
, 2py
, 2pz
) intermix
and redistribute into four identical sp3
 orbitals. As there are six
electrons and two sp3
 orbitals get pairs and two sp3
 orbitals get
one electron each. Now, the two sp3
 orbitals of ‘O’ atom overlap
1070
48/
∧
∧
∧
∧
∧
∧
Boran trifluoride
∧
Ammonia
Water
SCERT TELANGANA
172 X Class Chemical Bonding
the ‘s’ orbitals of two hydrogen atoms to give σsp3
-s bonds. Due to the
lone pair – lone pair repulsions and lone pair – bond pair repulsions HOH
decreases from 1090
28/
 (expected for sp3
 – tetrahedral hybridisation) to
1040
31/
.
CH4
, C2
H4
 and C2
H2
 molecules and their structures will be explained
in carbon and its compounds chapter later in this class.
Properties of ionic and covalent compounds
Table -4
From the above table we understand that ionic compounds like NaCl
are solids at room temperature.
Polar compounds like HCl possess properties like melting point,
boiling point, reactivity, solubility etc, between those of ionic compounds
and covalent compounds. If the covalent bond is between atoms of two
different elements, the shared electron pair shift more towards the atom
of more electronegative element. Thus within the molecule the more
electronegative atom bears a partial negative charge and the less
electronegative atom bears a partial positive charge. A molecule of this
type which is neutral but possesses partial charges on the atoms within the
molecule is called a polar molecule and the bond is called a polar covalent
bond or partial ionic and partial covalent bond.
Eg: H+Cl J +δ -δ
H - Cl
In ionic compounds there exist stronger electrostatic forces of
attractions between the oppositely charged ions of these compounds.
Therefore, they are solids with high melting points and boiling points. Based
S.No Property NaCl (ionic) HCl (polar covalent) C2
H6 (covalent)
1. Formula mass 58.5 36.5 30.0
2. Physical appearance White crystalline solid Colourless gas Colourless gas
3. Type of bond Ionic Polar covalent Covalent
4. Melting point 801 0
C -115 0
C -183 0
C
5. Boiling point 1413 0
C -84.9 0
C -88.63 0
C
6. Solubility Soluble in polar Soluble in polar solvents Soluble in non-polar
solvents like water like water and to some solvents but insoluble
and insoluble in non extent in non-polar in polar solvents like
-polar solvents solvents water
7. Chemical activity Highly reactive in polar Moderately Slow or very slow at
solvents and reactions reactive room temperature
are instantaneous
∧
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 173
Key words
Electrons, noble gases, Lewis dot structures, Octet rule, chemical bond, Ionic
bond, covalent bond, cation, anion, electrostatic force, electrovalent, polar solvent,
non-polar solvent, formation of molecules, ionic compounds, covalent compounds,
electro positive character, electro negative character, polar bonds, bonded pair
of electrons, lone pairs, bond length, bond energy, shape of the molecule, linear,
tetrahedral, properties of ionic and covalent compounds.
on the principle “like dissolves in like”, they being highly polar, soluble in
polar solvents. In chemical reaction of solution of ionic compounds simply
rearrangement of ions take place in the solutions, the reactions are
instantaneous or very fast.
The forces of attractions among covalent molecules are weak.
Therefore, the covalent compounds are gases or liquid at room temperature.
They have low melting points and low boiling points. Based on the principle
that “like dissolve in like” these covalent compounds are soluble in nonpolar solvents because of non-polar nature of solvent molecules. In
chemical reactions of covalent compounds there exist bond breaking and
bond forming to get products. There fore, these reactions are moderate or
very slow.
‘Like dissolves in like’ means what type of chemical bonds are there
in the solute particles that solute could be soluble in that solvent which
has the similar type of chemical bonds in its molecules.
What we have learnt
• Location of elements in the periodic table helps in predicting the type of bonding that will take
place between atoms of the elements.
• Ions are positively or negatively charged particles formed by the loss or gain of electrons
respectively.
• The force between any two atoms or a group of atoms that results in the formation of a stable
entity is called chemical bond.
• The outer most shell of an atom is called valence shell and electrons in this shell are called
valence electrons.
• The gases belonging to ‘O’ group are called noble gases because they are reluctant to combine
with other atoms. Except helium all other noble gases have an octet of electron configuration in
their valence shells.
• The reason why atoms form bond can be explained on the basis of the octet rule
• Chemically active elements have an incomplete octet in the valence shells of their atoms.
• The number of valence electrons available in the atoms of elements decides the type of bond
formed by the atom of the element.
• Elements which have a tendency to gain electrons for attaining octet in their valence shell are
called with more electro negative character. They form anions.
SCERT TELANGANA
174 X Class Chemical Bonding
Improve your learning
• In the formation of ionic bond the atoms of electro positive elements lose their valence electrons to
atoms of electro negative elements so that both of them can attain octet in their valence shells.
• The electrostatic attractive force that keeps cation and anion together to form a new electrically
neutral entity is called an ionic bond.
• Ionic compounds are often crystalline solids with high melting points.
• A chemical bond that formed by sharing of valence-shell electrons between the atoms so that both
of them can attain octet or duplet in their valence shells is called covalent bond.
• A single covalent bond is formed when two atoms share a pair of electrons
• Each shared pair of electrons is equivalent to one covalent bond.
• Electrons are not always shared equally between the atoms in a covalent bond. This leads to bond
polarity.
• To explain the bond angles in the molecules through covalent bonds the valence – shell – electron
– pair repulsion theory (VSEPRT) is proposed.
• To explain the strengths of covalent bonds valence band theory is discussed.
Reflections on concepts
1. List the factors that determine the type of bond that will be formed between two atoms? (AS1
)
2. Explain the difference between the valence electrons and the co-valency of an element. (AS1
)
3. A chemical compound has the following Lewis notation: (AS1
)
a) How many valence electrons does element Y have?
b) What is the valency of element Y?
c) What is the valency of element X?
d) How many covalent bonds are there in the molecule?
e) To which groups the elements X and Y belong? (AS2
)
4. Why do only valence electrons involve in bond formation? Why not electron of inner shells?Explain.
(AS1
)
5. How bond energies and bond lengths of molecule help us in predicting their chemical properties?
Explain with examples. (AS1
)
6. Draw simple diagrams to show how electrons are arranged in the following covalent molecules:
(AS5
)
a) Calcium oxide (CaO) (b) Water (H2
O) (c) Chlorine (Cl
2
)
7. Represent the molecule H2
O using Lewis notation. (AS5)
8. Represent each of the following atoms using Lewis notation: (AS5
)
(a) beryllium (b) calcium (c) lithium d) bromine gas (Br2
)
(e) calcium chloride (CaCl
2
) (f) carbon dioxide (CO2
)
9. What is octet rule? How do you appreciate role of the ‘octet rule’ in explaining the chemicalproperties
of elements? (AS6
)
10. What is hybridisation? Explain the formation of the following molecules using hybridisation
 a) Be Cl
2 b) BF3
Fig-Q3
. .
. .
. .
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 175
Application of Concepts
1. Explain the formation of sodium chloride and calcium oxide on the basis of the concept of electron
transfer from one atom to another atom. (AS1
)
2. A, B, and C are three elements with atomic numbers 6, 11 and 17 respectively.
i. Which of these cannot form ionic bond? Why? (AS1
)
ii. Which of these cannot form covalent bond? Why? (AS1
)
iii. Which of these can form ionic as well as covalent bonds? (AS1
)
3. Predict the reasons for low melting point for covalent compounds when compared with ionic
compound. (AS2
)
4. How Lewis dot structure helps in understanding bond formation between atoms? (AS6
)
5. Explain the formation of the following molecules using valence bond theory
a) N2
 molecule b) O2
 molecule
Higher Order Thinking questions
1. Two chemical reactions are described below. (AS5
)
• Nitrogen and hydrogen react to form ammonia (NH3
)
• Carbon and hydrogen bond together to form a molecule of methane (CH4
).
For each reaction, give:
(a) The valence of each of the atoms involved in the reaction. (AS1
)
(b) The Lewis structure of the product that is formed. (AS5
)
1) Which one of the following four elements is more electronegative? [ ]
a) Sodium b) Oxygen c) Magnesium d) Calcium
2) An element 11X23 forms an ionic compound with another element ‘Y’. Then the charge on the ion
formed by X is [ ]
a) +1 b) +2 c) -1 d) -2
3) An element ‘A’ forms a chloride ACl
4
. The number electrons in the valence shell of ‘A’ is
a) 1 b) 2 c) 3 d) 4 [ ]
4) The inert gas element which does not have octet electronic configuration in its outermost orbit is
a) Helium b) Argon c) Krepton d) Radon
5) Number of covalent bonds in methane molecule
a) 1 b) 2 c) 3 d) 4
6) The concept hybridisation of orbitals of an atoms was introdused by
a) Lives pouling b) Mosley c) Lewis d) Kossel
7) The value of bond angle in Berileum chloride molecule is
a) 1800 b) 1200 c) 1100 d) 104.310
Suggested Projects
1. Collect the information about properties and uses of covalent compounds and prepare a report?
(AS4)