Let us look at the final phase of National Movement and try to understand the
situations that led to the partition of India. The people of the country faced very
difficult questions and had to accept very difficult answers in these years.
Should the War be supported by Indians? 1939-42
You have read about the Second World War already. When the war started in
1939, most of the provinces of India were governed by Congress ministries. The
British government had agreed to give the Indians the right to rule themselves to
some extent. The British parliament passed the Government of India Act in 1935.
According to this, provinces could hold elections and winning parties could form
governments. However, the right to vote was given to a small section of the
population – only about 12 % for provincial
assemblies and about 1 % for the Central
assembly. When elections were held in the
assemblies of the 11 provinces of British
India in 1937, Congress won in most
provinces. Eight out of 11 provinces had a
Congress “Prime Minister”, working under
the supervision of a British Governor.
The world war was going on. Congress
leaders were now facing a difficult situation.
Should they help the British in fighting the
war against Germany, Japan, Italy and other
Axis forces? Britain had decided that India
will participate in the war without even asking
them. There were reasons both for and against
supporting the war.
 The Congress was divided on this issue. Most Congress leaders were opposed
to Hitler, Mussolini and the ideology of fascism. They wanted to fight against the
Fascist drive to conquer other sovereign nations. The Congress expected that the
British would see their double standards in the expectation that India should support
them in fighting the fascists but not giving (or at least promising) India full freedom.
The British realised this but, at the same time, it was hard for them to accept that
they will really have to dismantle the empire they had built. There were different
National Movement in India – Partition &
Independence : 1939-1947
Do you think Indians should have
felt grateful to the British
government for the powers given by
the Act of 1935?
Do you think the rise of Hitler was
such a big threat to the freedom of
humanity that Indians should have set
aside their fight for freedom from
the British and concentrated on the
fight for a free world?
According to you, what would be the
reasons for and against supporting
the British in the World War II?
CHAPTER
14
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 203
LETTER TO ADOLF HITLER
HERR HITLER
BERLIN
GERMANY
DEAR FRIEND,
Friends have been urging me to write to you
for the sake of humanity. But I have resisted their
request, because of the feeling that any letter from
me would be an impertinence. Something tells me
that I must not calculate and that I must make
my appeal for whatever it may be worth.
It is quite clear that you are today the one
person in the world who can prevent a war which
may reduce humanity to the savage state.
Must you pay that price for an object however
worthy it may appear to you to be? Will you listen
to the appeal of one who has deliberately shunned
the method of war not without considerable
success?
Anyway I anticipate your forgiveness, if I have
erred in writing to you.
I remain, Your sincere friend,
M. K. GANDHI
Source: The Collected Works of Mahatma Gandhi,
Vol. 76 : 31 May, 1939 - 15 October, 1939.
political parties in Britain. At
the time of the War, Britain had
an all-party government headed
by Prime Minister Winston
Churchill of the Conservative
party. The Conservatives wanted
to maintain the empire for as
long as possible. In comparison
to the Conservatives, the Labour
party was more willing to help
Indians get their freedom.
The British were willing to
give the status of Dominion to
India under the British Crown
soon after the War. But the
Congress wanted a promise of
complete freedom for India.
The Congress also demanded
that an immediate national
government should be set up at
the Centre. The British objected
to this by saying that they have
to also protect the interests of
several other communities in
India. They meant that Congress
did not represent all Indians,
like Muslims. They also implied that Congress may be ignoring the interests of
many Indians. So, the British were required to protect these interests.
Fig 14.2 : Elephants Loading Supplies in C-46
Planes during Second World War in India
Fig 14.1 : Crossing Iravady river in
1945, Royal Indian Army
SCERT TELANGANA
204 Social Studies National Movement in India–Partition & Independence...
The government had got special war time powers to maintain law and order to
be able to focus on winning the war. Anyone who opposed the government could be
jailed immediately and kept in prison
for a long time without going to court.
People were not given the freedom of
speech. Through 1940 and 1941, the
Congress organised a series of
individual satyagrahas to pressurise the
British to promise freedom once the
war had ended. No major mass protest
was launched at this time.
The Congress was upset that the
British refuse to promise freedom to
India and decided to walk out of the
provincial governments. All the
Congress ministries who had come to
power in 1937 resigned in October
1939.
Who represents the people of the country?
Now that the Indian people were revolting against the British rule, they were
upset. They looked for ways to punish the Congress and make it weak and unpopular
among the people. The British started questioning the right of the Congress to
represent the people of the country. Now, they followed the ‘Divide and Rule Policy’
more vigorously.
To achieve this, the British government supported and encouraged the plans of
the Muslim League and gave little importance to the Congress. In this period, the
Muslim League and its leaders like M. A. Jinnah became more active in mass
politics.
The Muslim League
 Muslim League was formed in 1906. Till the 1930s, it mainly represented the
interests of Muslim landlords of UP and did not have much mass support. It had
demanded that the British should create separate seats in all councils for which
only Muslims would vote. It had argued that since the majority people in many
areas were Hindus, there were more chances of Hindus getting elected to councils.
If this happened, Muslims would not be able to protect their interests in the
government. But, if a certain number of seats were reserved for Muslims for which
only the Muslim population of an area would vote, these Muslim members would
be able to raise the concerns and problems of Muslims. The Congress had accepted
this logic and separate electorates were implemented from 1909. When provincial
Do you think the Congress could have
taken some other steps to protest against
the attitude of the British?
Why did the British not make the promise
and win the support of the Indians? After
all, in 1939, only a promise was being
asked for? Discuss together in class.
When ministers resign, who continues to
conduct the day to day affairs of
governance?
Imagine what would happen if Congress
leaders increased their protests against
the British government at this point of
time? Would it make the fight for freedom
stronger?
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 205
Discuss the importance of addressing the
concerns of minorities. Why is it felt that
majority based elections are not enough to
help minorities?
Separate electorate was one method to
protect minority interests. Can you think of
some other methods that can be helpful for
this purpose? For example, would it help if
there was a rule that a non Muslim member
of a council must consult the Muslim
population of his/ her constituency before
voting on an issue that concerned them?
When would such a method work and under
what conditions would it fail to be effective?
governments were elected in 1937, the League won 102 of the 482 Muslim seats
in the country. However, the Congress also fought elections on the Muslim seats
because it believed that it was a national party and not a party of only Hindus. The
Congress won 26 out of the 58 Muslim seats it had contested.
In 1937, the Muslim League got only 4.4 percent of the total Muslim votes in
the elections. The Muslim League
was popular in the United Provinces,
Bombay and Madras. However, it
was quite weak in the three
provinces from which Pakistan was
to be made just ten years later, that
is, Bengal, the North-West Frontier
Province (now in Pakistan) and
Punjab. Even in Sind, it failed to
form a government. But the
situation changed in the next 10
years. In 1946, when elections
were held again for the provincial
and central assemblies, the League
succeeded in winning the Muslim
seats.
What happened to the Muslim population in the years between 1937 and 1947?
The League pointed out many issues. It blamed that Congress was insensitive to
the needs of Muslims. For example, the Congress refused to form a coalition
government with the Muslim League in the United Provinces where it too had won
many seats. The Congress had banned its members from taking membership of the
Muslim League. Congress members could be members of the Hindu Mahasabha
before. But this was also banned from 1938, only after objections from Muslim
Congressmen like Maulana Azad. Thus, the League created the impression that
Congress was basically a Hindu party and did not want to share power with the
Muslims.
The Hindu Mahasabha and the RSS
During this period, the Hindu Mahasabha and the Rashtriya Swayamsewak Sangh
(RSS), a national cultural organisation were mobilizing the Hindus. These
organisations wished to unite all the Hindus and overcome the divisions of caste
and sect to reform their social life. They also gave out the message that India was
the land of the Hindus who were in a majority. Many Congressmen were also
impressed with the activities of these organisations.
Congress tried very hard to create a secular understanding among its members.
It also tried to connect with the Muslim masses and make them feel secure. They
SCERT TELANGANA
206 Social Studies National Movement in India–Partition & Independence...
Dr BR Ambedkar, Pakistan or the
Partition of India “Introduction” 1940
It is beyond question that Pakistan is
a scheme which will have to be taken into
account. The Muslims will insist upon the
scheme being considered… The British
cannot consent to settle power upon an
aggressive Hindu majority and make it its
heir, leaving it to deal with the minorities
at its sweet pleasure. That would not be
ending imperialism. It would be creating
another imperialism.
wanted to change the wrong impression that was being created in their minds by
the messages and activities of organisations like the Muslim League, the Hindu
Mahasabha and the RSS. Congress argued that Hindus and Muslims were not people
of two different nations, but part and parcel of one Indian nation. However, the
British were eagerly listening to the fears of the League about Hindu domination
and suggesting ways to make the Muslims secure.
The “Pakistan” Resolution
Many people now felt that the separate governing arrangements were needed
for regions where Muslims were in majority. For example, the Urdu poet
Mohammad Iqbal, the writer of the song “Sare Jahan Se Achha Hindustan
Hamara”, spoke of a need for a “North- West Indian Muslim state” in his
presidential address to the Muslim League in 1930.
The name Pakistan or Pak-stan (from
Punjab, Afghan, Kashmir, Sind and
Baluchistan) was coined by a Punjabi Muslim
student at Cambridge, Choudhry Rehmat Ali.
This young student wrote pamphlets between
1933 and 1935. He desired a separate national
status for this new entity. No one took Rehmat
Ali seriously in the 1930s, especially the
League and other Muslim leaders who
dismissed his idea merely as a student’s dream.
The political situation in India changed
when British started following the policy of
‘Divide and Rule’ and Congress failed to
address the fears of Muslims. On 23 March
1940, the Muslim League moved a resolution and demanded autonomy for the
parts of the subcontinent where Muslim were in majority. This ambiguous resolution
never mentioned partition or Pakistan. However, in later years, it became known
as the Pakistan resolution. People were thinking of different ways to solve the
issues raised by the League and a new nation state of Pakistan was one among
these alternatives. But since the discussions and negotiations were not working
out, the idea of a separate nation state of Pakistan became stronger. The Congress
was unable to fulfill the demands of M A Jinnah, leader of the Muslim League.
From 1940 to 1946, the League convinced Muslim masses about the benefits
and need for a separate nation. Peasants could imagine a state where Hindu zamindars
and moneylenders did not exploit them. Traders, businessmen and job seekers could
think of a state where competition from Hindu traders, businessmen and job seekers
would not be there. There would be greater religious freedom. There would be
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 207
How would people assess the possible
benefits from the politics of Muslim
League? Would they have any doubts?
What kind of questions would they
have? Discuss.
freedom for the Muslim elite to run the
government the way they wanted. From
1942 to 1945, most Congress leaders
were in jail. The League made use of the
time to build its base among the people.
Who Will Make the British Quit India?
 By 1941, Japan had started expanding into South East Asia. This was clear
threat to Indian territories as well. The British wanted Indian people to support it in
the war against Japan. In March 1942, Prime Minister Churchill was persuaded to
send one of his ministers, Sir Stafford Cripps, to India to try and make a compromise
with Gandhi and the Congress. But these talks failed after the Congress insisted
that the Viceroy should first appoint an Indian as the Defence Member of his
Executive Council.
After the failure of the Cripps Mission, Mahatma Gandhi decided to launch his
third major movement against the British rule. This was the “Quit India” campaign.
This campaign began in August 1942. Although Gandhi was sent to jail, other younger
activists organised strikes and acts of sabotage all over the country. The young
men and women left their colleges to go to jail in very large numbers. Socialist
members of the Congress, such as Jayaprakash Narayan, were particularly active
in the underground resistance movement. In several districts, such as Satara in the
west and Medinipur in the east, “independent” governments were declared. The
British responded with a lot of force, yet it took them more than a year to suppress
this rebellion.
 The Communist Party of India, in the meanwhile, decided to support the British
war effort. It was alarmed at the attack on the Soviet Union by the Nazis. It realised
the danger at a world level and called the war a People’s War. On the contrary,
Gandhi felt that Indians would be able to handle Japan on their own after the British
leave India.
The initial victories of Japan against the Americans and Europeans created a
strong impression on the people in India. Firstly, it seemed that the European
colonialists would get defeated very soon. Secondly, Japan was an Asian country
and could stand up against the European colonialists. Indians felt that they too can
stand up and fight against Britain decisively. The myth that the British race was
superior than others was destroyed in the minds of people.
Subhash Chandra Bose wanted to take up the opportunity created by the
difficulties of the British. He said that India’s independence was of utmost
importance and we should take the help of the Japanese to throw out the British.
He went secretly to Germany and Japan and collected an army of Indian soldiers in
1942.
SCERT TELANGANA
208 Social Studies National Movement in India–Partition & Independence...
Review the period between
1942-45. How can you say that
the resistance of Indian people
to the British rule had become
more powerful than ever
before?
Fig 14.3 : Subhash Chandra Bose
Why did the Japanese allow Bose to
recruit soldiers whom they had
imprisoned?
Why did the Indian soldiers join INA?
Why were Indian soldiers not scared of
losing the war and falling into the hands
of the British? What would the British
do to them?
Who were these
soldiers? In the beginning,
these Indian soldiers were in
the British army. They had
been captured by the
Japanese when the British
were defeated in Burma and
Malaya. They were POWs
(prisoners of war). Bose
recruited them in his army
which he called the Indian
National Army (INA). Later,
other Indians also joined the
army including many
women. However, Gandhi
did not agree with the plans of Bose. He
felt that the Japanese cannot be the
liberators of India. But Subhash
continued in his chosen path and led an
army of Indian soldiers to fight along
with the Imperial Army of Japan against
the British for almost three years.
This time was very dramatic and
difficult for the entire world. At one
point, it had seemed that the Allied
powers were losing the war. But Russia stopped the Nazi forces with the victory in
Stalingrad. The Allied powers regained control and eventually won the Second World
War. Subhash Bose’s INA was defeated by the
British army. After this, it is not certain whether
Bose disappeared or died.
In June 1944, when the war was about to end,
the British government released Gandhi from
prison. They set the time for another round of
negotiations and talks for Indian independence.
The popular Upsurge -1946-48
The soldiers of INA were imprisoned and the British decided to punish them. A
trial of INA soldiers was begun. The British decided to court martial them for
being traitors to the army and hanging them to death in punishment.
There was unrest, unhappiness and discontent in different parts of India when
the INA trials started. The issue of Hindu- Muslim identity and separatist politics
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 209
Imagine the tragic turn of events and
how these must have affected the
lives of these people?
What horror would the other Indians
have felt at the thought that the INA
soldiers who were like heroes to
them were being tried and hanged as
traitors by the British?
Fig 14.4 : Memorial for the Naval guards who
revolted for India’s freedom in 1946
often became unimportant during such times. For example, many of the INA soldiers
who were being tried for treason were Muslims, yet the people’s anger and sympathy
gave no thought to the religion of the soldiers.
If you imagine yourself in the years after
the War ended, it will be easy to understand
the situation in the country. People were
restless because of food shortages, rationing
of food, high prices, black marketeering and
hoarding. Workers were angry about low
wages. Railway, postal employees and other
government employees were planning to go
on India wide strike against prices.
On 18th February 1946, the guards or
Ratings of the Royal Indian Navy in Bombay harbour went on hunger strike to
protest against bad food and behaviour of their British officers. The strike rapidly
spread to other naval men on the Bombay shore and all the naval bases in India. The
navy men put up the tricolour, the crescent and the hammer and sickle flags jointly
on the mast of the ship. A Naval Central Strike committee was elected with M S
Khan as its head. The strike committee demanded better food, equal pay for white
and Indian sailors. They also demanded for the release of INA and other political
prisoners and withdrawal of Indian troops from Indonesia.
78 ships, 20 shore establishments, and
20,000 Ratings took part in the strike.
Hundreds of students, both Hindus and
Muslims, came out on the streets of
Bombay to support them. They also clashed
with the police and the army. On February
22, 3 lakh mill workers put down their tools
in Bombay and fought violently for 2 days
on the streets with the police and the army.
The year 1946 was a year of strikes
and work stoppages in factories and mills
in many parts of the country. CPI and the
Socialist parties were active in these
movements. The countryside was also on
the boil.
An agitation was started in Bengal by
small and poor peasants who took land of the bigger landowners to cultivate. They
demanded that their share of harvest should be increased to two portions out of
three instead of half or even less. This was eventually given to them at that time.
This was called the Tebhaga movement and was led by the Provincial Kisan Sabha.
SCERT TELANGANA
210 Social Studies National Movement in India–Partition & Independence...
What were the demands of the Muslim
League that were not acceptable to the
Congress? Do you agree with the reasons
of the Congress?
According to you, what did the election
results of 1946 indicate about public mood?
Review the actions of ordinary masses in
the country. What were they demanding?
It was noted that religious divisions were
not important in many of these mass
movements mentioned above. What could
be the reason for the unity of the people
in these movements?
In Hyderabad, the Communist party led a massive movement of farmers of the
Telangana region. The Telangana farmers opposed the large land owners and
demanded that debts of farmers be cancelled. They also demanded that bonded
labour should be stopped and land be
distributed to those who worked on it.
The peasants took up arms to fight against
the rulers and their armies. Almost 3000
villages were part of the movement.
Another armed revolt of peasants took
place in Travancore (Kerala) in PunnapraVayalar.
Muslim League and Congress - Negotiation for transfer of power
When political negotiations between top leaders began again in l945, the British
agreed to create an entirely Indian central Executive Council, except for the Viceroy
and the Commander-in-Chief of the armed forces. They did this as a first step
towards full independence. Discussions about the transfer of power failed due to
Jinnah’s demand that the League should have an absolute right to choose all the
Muslim members of the Executive Council. This demand was not acceptable to
others. Most nationalist Muslims supported the Congress Party. The Unionist Party
of Punjab, which had a large number of Muslim members, did not agree with Muslim
League’s demand. In fact, Maulana Azad was the leader of the Congress Party
delegation for these discussions as he was the President of this party!
In 1946, elections were held for the Provincial Governments. The Muslim League
won all 30 reserved constituencies in the Centre and 442 out of 509 seats in the
provinces. The League was able to establish itself as the dominant party among Muslim
voters only around 1946. It wanted to
represent itself as the “sole
spokesperson” of India’s Muslims. It
had got more than 86% of the Muslim
votes. In 1946, the Congress swept the
general constituencies, capturing over
91 per cent of the non-Muslim vote.
A possible alternative to Partition
In March 1946, the British Cabinet sent a three member mission team to Delhi
to examine the demand made by the League and suggest a suitable political
framework for Indian freedom. This Cabinet Mission toured the country for three
months and recommended a three-tier confederation but India was to remain united.
Initially, all the major parties accepted this plan. But the agreement was shortlived because the parties had different opinions of the plan. Ultimately, neither the
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 211
Fig 14.5 : Jawaharlal Nehru at Independence declaration
League nor the
Congress agreed to
the Cabinet Mission’s
proposal.
The Muslim
League decided that
its demands cannot be
met through
discussions and it
must ask the people
to come out on the
streets. It decided on
“Direct Action” to
win its demand for
Pakistan and
announced 16 August
1946 as “Direct Action Day”. On this day, riots started in Calcutta. These riots
lasted for several days and several thousand people died in the riots. By March
1947, violence spread to many parts of northern India.
Because of the mass violence, the Congress agreed for dividing the Punjab
into two halves in March 1947. One half was to be with Muslim majority and the
other with Hindu/ Sikh majority. Congress also agreed for a similar division in
Bengal.
In February 1947, Mountbatten replaced Wavell and became the Viceroy.
Mountbatten started one last round of talks to find a solution. When these talk also
failed, he announced that British India would become freed but also would be divided.
Muslim majority areas of Punjab, NWFP, Sind, Baluchistan and East Bengal would
be made part of a new state of Pakistan. The formal transfer of power from British
Government to Pakistan would be done on 14th and to India, it would be done on
the 15th of August, 1947. This solution was the only workable solution to end the
year of riots, bloodshed and hatred that people were filled with.
Partition and migrations
Now that a Muslim nation, Pakistan, was created, a painful and unimaginable
situation arose for many people. Most Hindus living on Pakistani side of the border
felt insecure and forced to leave their homes. So did many Muslims, living on the
other side of this border. Not all the people wanted this, not all the people understood
why this was happening. They felt anger and hatred against each other for being
forced to move out of their homes, villages and cities. Around 1.5 crore people,
both Hindus and Muslims, were displaced. They killed, looted and burnt each other.
Between two to five lakh people, both Muslims and Hindus, were killed. Some
SCERT TELANGANA
212 Social Studies National Movement in India–Partition & Independence...
Fig 14.6 : Newspaper report on Indian Independence. What different items can you
SCERT
identify in it? Discuss.
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 213
were became refugees, lived in relief camps, and travelled on trains to find shelters.
Mahatma Gandhi moved amongst the riot hit people, in camps and hospitals. He
was trying to spread the message of peace and brotherhood. This was not the freedom
and Swaraj he had worked so hard to achieve. The Father of the Nation fasted and
did not celebrate on the first Independence Day.
At the initiative of Gandhi and Nehru, Congress now passed a resolution on
“the rights of minorities”. Congress party had never accepted the “two-nation
theory”. It was forced to accept Partition against its will. It still believed that “India
is a land of many religions and many races, and must remain so”. Whatever be the
situation in Pakistan, India would be “a democratic secular State” where all citizens
Fig 14.7 : Various scenes of partition.
Describe/Imagine the experiences of these
migrants.
SCERT TELANGANA
214 Social Studies National Movement in India–Partition & Independence...
enjoy full rights and are have equal right to get the protection of the State,
irrespective of the religion to which they belong.
Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi
On 15th August, 1947, Mahatma Gandhi, father of the nation, was trying to
bring peace to riot-torn Noahkhali (in Bengal). He came to the capital, Delhi, only
on 9th September, 1947. The old man was unhappy with the communal riots in
north-western India and tried to calm the fears and anger of the people. Yet,
some sections of people were annoyed with Gandhi for his role in Indian politics.
They disturbed his all-religion prayer meetings many times. An unsuccessful
attempt on his life was made two days before his actual assassination. It was on
28 January, 1948 that Gandhi said, “If I am to die by the bullet of a mad man, I
must do so smiling. There must be no anger within me. God must be in my heart
and on my lips.”
Finally, less than six months after Independence,
on the evening of 30th January, 1948, Gandhi was shot
with three bullets while going for his all-religion prayer
meeting. Before dying Gandhi said, ‘Hey Ram’. His
assassin, Nathuram Godse ran off from the scene of
crime and was later arrested in Bombay. He was once
a member of Hindu Mahasabha and because of his
actions, many became against this organisation.
Consequently, on 14th February, 1948, All India Hindu
Mahasabha decided to ‘suspend its political work and
concentrate on real organisational work’ instead. A
fanatic Godse had, thereby, hurt his own friends and
harmed his own mission.
Integration of States
There were around 550 Princely states in India.
These states enjoyed different levels of sovereignty but all were under British
power. As the British were going to withdraw from India, these princely states
were going to become independent. They were asked to decide if they wanted to
join India, Pakistan or remain independent. The ordinary people of the princely
states had become aware of democratic rights through participation in Praja Mandal
movements. They did not want the princely families to continue to rule over them.
In Travancore and Hyderabad, peasants were revolting with arms against the ruling
zamindars.
The Congress supported the movements of the people of the princely states
and declared that they should join India in making the new Constitution of the
country. Sardar Patel was given charge of this matter in July 1947. He began
Fig 14.8 : Mahatma Gandhi SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 215
Improve your learning
1. Make a table and show how different groups, and individuals in India responded to
World War II What dilemmas were faced by these groups? (AS1
)
2. Given the brutal manner in which particular communities like Jews and others were
treated in Germany, do you think it would have been morally right to support Germany
or Japan? (AS1
)
3. Make a list of various reasons for the Partition of the country. (AS1
)
4. What were the different ways in which power sharing among different communities
was organised before Partition? (AS1
)
5. How did British colonialists practice their ‘divide and rule’ policy in India? How
was it similar or different from what you have studied about Nigeria? (AS1
)
6. What were the different ways in which religion was used in politics before Partition? (AS1
)
7. How were workers and peasants mobilised during the last years of freedom struggle? (AS1
)
8. How did Partition affect the lives of ordinary people? What was the political response
to mass migration following Partition? (AS1
)
9. Integration of various princely states into the new Indian nation was a challenging
task. Discuss. (AS1
)
10. Locate the following in the political map of India. (AS5
)
a) Kashmir b) Hyderabad c) Junagarh d) Bengal e) Travancore
11. Which qualities do you like in Subhash Chandra Bose ? Why. (AS6
)
Keywords
Dominion status Divide and rule Separate electorate
discussions with the princes about the necessity to join India. He even made it
clear that if they did not do so, the army would have to be sent to complete the
process of unification. By 15th August 1947, all states except Kashmir, Hyderabad
and Junagadh had agreed to sign the Instrument of Accession with India. These three
states were also made to join in the next two years.
The government of these princely states was taken over and the princes were
given pension funds called privy-purse to meet their personal expenses. New
administrative units were created by combining different territories. The first phase
of this process of creating the new states of India went on till 1956. Interestingly,
in 1971, the government of India abolished the privy purses and titles used by the
former princely families.
The modern India that you know came into being. In 1947, it was a poor nation
with low human development indicators and bad infrastructural facilities. In two
centuries, colonialism had blocked the development of the country and tried to
destroy the self-confidence of its people. Building a modern self-dependent and
equitable nation in India was both a challenge and an opportunity.