Introduction
In this chapter, we shall talk about the history of the world in the first half
of the 20th century, the causes and consequences of the two World Wars and
the creation of an institution like the United Nations to ensure world peace
and development.
The Twentieth Century
Eric Hobsbawm, a historian, called the 20th century ‘The Age of Extremes’.
On one hand, Fascism was growing strong because of its ideas of unquestioned
power and hatred for other people. On the other hand, the need for democracy was also
growing. The average life expectancy rate was growing higher because of new discoveries
in the field of medicine. Literacy levels also became high i.e. more people had access to
better education. New art forms like movies also
became known. In the field of Science, new discoveries
were made about life and atoms. More than hundred
countries became independent all over the world.
Many great experiments happened in the 20th
century. In some countries, socialist societies came up.
In Socialist societies, people lived with Equality &
Fraternity. Some countries adopted Liberal Democracy
where people had political liberty and a Capitalist
economy.
At the beginning of the 20th century, the world was
divided into developed industrialised countries of the
West (including Britain, USA, Germany, France, Italy,
etc) and colonized countries of Asia, and Africa. These
countries were under the control of developed nations.
The industrialised countries had split into two enemy
groups or blocks. Germany, Austria and Hungary were
on one side and Britain, France and Russia were on the
CHAPTER
The World During the World Wars 12
Timeline
Beginning of First World
War
ï 1914
End of First World War
ï 1917
Treaty of Versailles
ï 1918
ï 1919
Formation of USSR ï 1922
Great Depression ï 1929
Hitler becomes the
Chancellor of Germany ï 1933
Beginning of Second
World War ï 1939
End of Second World War ï 1945
Formation of UNO ï 1945
Russion Revolution SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 163
Fig 12.2: For the first time in history planes were
used to drop bombs in WW I.
another side. Each group wanted to
dominate over the world and control as
many colonies and markets as possible
which led to the occurrence of world
wars.
The First World War began in 1914.
It was really a World War because
almost all the countries (imperial
nations and their colonies) of the world
took part in the war. China, Japan on the
East and the US on the West took part
in the war. The First World War ended
in 1918. Britain and France defeated
Germany and its allies in the war.
Causes for the World Wars
Aggressive Nationalism
The ideology of nationalism was a positive impulse. Many newly formed
modern nations were created in Europe because of people’s strong feeling of
nationalism. It was also the force behind the unification of Germany and Italy. But
this ideology created pride in these nations and hatred against the neighbouring
countries.
Italian Fascism and National Socialism of German Nazis were the other forms
of aggressive Nationalism in destructive mode from 1923. Fascists promoted
aggressive nationalism and the image of victorious Germany ruling over the world.
They also mobilized the Germans against the other nations of Europe.
Imperialism
With the growth of industrial capitalism, European countries like Britain,
Germany and US needed to access raw materials and markets for their products.
They wanted to invest their growing capital in the colonies. Thus, by the end of the
19th century there was a race for colonies between the European powers. The
newly emerged industrial powers (like Germany and Italy) wanted to re-divide the
colonies but the old industrial powers were not ready for this. This created a lot
of tension often leading to wars.
SCERT TELANGANA
164 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
Secret Alliances
After defeating France in 1870, Bismarck, the German Chancellor, wanted to
isolate France. He made a secret alliance with Austria in 1879 and Italy and Austria
in 1882.Hence it was called Tripple Alliance . France made a mutual alliance with
Russia in 1891 and with Britain in 1904. To protect itself, Russia, France and
Britain formed their Triple Entente in 1907.The Triple Alliance led by Germany
and the Triple Entente made the European powers jealous and suspicious of one
another. Instead of real peace, these alliances created an atmosphere of fear and
‘armed peace’ in Europe.
Militarism
Militarism is the belief that military
power is the best way to ensure security
and to solve problems. The military
expenditure of the six powerful
countries (viz. Germany, Russia,
Austria, Italy, France and Britain)
increased by over three times, i.e. from
£ 132 million to £ 397 million during
the years from 1880 to 1914.
There are three important things in
the context of militarism. Firstly, all
these countries had built massive
standing armies for their defence.
Secondly, they competed with each
other in increasing their military
weapons. They encouraged people to
support wars. Thirdly, a large industry
of weapons emerged which constantly promoted the idea of using war as a solution
to diplomatic problems.
Graph 1 : The Armaments Race
Military expenditure by great powers (Germany, AustriaHungary, Great Britain, Russia, Italy and France 1880-1914
(source The Times Atlas of World History, London 1978) in million Pounds
1880 1890 1900 1910 1914
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
132
158
205
288
397
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 165
Balkan politics
There were many small kingdoms in the Balkan Peninsula. People belonging
to many sects, languages were living there. They were being ruled under the Ottoman
Turkey empire. After the fall of Ottoman Empire, Austria, Germany, Turkey, Russia
competed for the supremacy over the area. Moreover, Russia and Turkey were
trying to control the Black sea and the Mediterranean Sea region into their hands
for a long time. So, there was always tense situation around the region. During the
same time, Austria was trying to suppress the Serbian rebels in Bosnia, who were
against to the rule of Austria.
Immediate cause
On June 28, 1914, a Bosnian Serb assassinated the crown prince Archduke
Franz Ferdinand of Austria- Hungary. Austria asked Serbia for the explanation on
this. Austria, declared war on Serbia after the unsatisfactory reply of Serbia on 28
July 1914. This was the immediate cause of the first world war. As Serbia was on
the side of Britain, France, Russia alliance, they came to support it. Germany and
its group also decided to jump into the war in support of Austria .This was called
the First World War.
The countries which were participated on behalf of Austria were known as
Central Powers where as the other group was called as Allied Powers. Central
Powers got upper hand over the Allied Powers in the beginning of the war. Due to
internal revolution, Russia, the Allied Power, withdrawn from the war by making
treaty with Germany in 1917. On the other hand, US also jumped into the war on
behalf of Allied countries when German troops sunk its commercial ship, Lusitania
in 1917. Thus ,Allied Powers became victorious in the war.
The world after the First World War
The Treaty of Versailles, 1919
After the first world war, many discussions and treaties were done. Britain and
its three allies imposed the terms and conditions of the treaty on the defeated
powers. The Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Turkey empires were dissolved and
broken up into small nation states. The German Empire too was broken up and
replaced by a democratic republic. The Ottoman Empire was replaced by the
Republic of Turkey and its colonies in Africa were divided among the victorious
SCERT TELANGANA
166 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
How do you think organisations like the
League of Nations help to resolve
conflicts between two countries? What
can they do to resolve the conflicts?
powers. A large number of new countries were formed like Austria, Hungary,
Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Estonia, Latvia, Finland, etc.
 The Treaty of Versailles imposed heavy penalty on Germany both in monetary
terms – Germany had to pay war indemnity or compensation to the victorious
allies – and in territorial terms, it lost a lot of its territory to France and other
countries.
The League of Nations-1920
The League of Nations was the first ever
international organisation which was formed
as a consequence of the treaty of Versailles.
It was established on Eleventh of January,
1920. It was formed to prevent wars by
trying to settle disputes through
negotiations, ensure disarmament or reduce
manufacturing of arms etc. It also sought
to work for development, labour welfare
and health. It had about fifty eight members.
It had limited success initially but failed to
prevent the Second World War.
The Russian Socialist Revolution
(1917-1922)
Russia was ruled by Tsars (emperors) in early 20th century. It was a vast area of
land spread over two continents, Europe and Asia. Therefore it had been called a
Euro-Asian power. It had the third largest population in the world, viz. 156 million,
after China and India. It comprised of several nations like Russia, Ukraine,
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan etc. The livelihood of most
Russians came from agriculture. Often there were struggles between peasants and
feudal lords for control over land. The feudal lords owned most of the lands and
most peasants paid rent for the land they tilled.
Tsar Nicholas II ruled over his vast Russian empire with the help of the army
and bureaucracy. But the Russian economy had suffered a lot by the first World
War. The Russian army was the largest in the world before World War I. Yet, by
1917, Russia had lost the lives of two million soldiers and civilians. It became the
Date of the Russian Revolution
Russia followed the Julian calendar until
1 February 1918. The country then
changed to the Gregorian calendar, which
is followed everywhere today. The
Gregorian dates are 13 days ahead of the
Julian dates. So, by our calendar, the
‘February’ Revolution took place on 12th
March and the ‘October’ Revolution took
place on 7th November. SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 167
Fig 12.3: Lenin addressing workers in 1917
biggest loser of human lives in World
War I. A large amount of food was
supplied to the War front during the war.
This led to the shortage of food in the
cities. On March 8th 1917, around 10,000
women of the capital St Petersburg, took
out a procession demanding ‘Peace and
Bread’. Workers also joined them in this
protest. Tsar Nicholas II was really upset
by these protests. He ordered the army
to suppress the demonstrators, even by
firing at them. Instead, the soldiers also
joined the demonstrators. In just two
days, the situation became so bad that the
Tsar left his throne and escaped. Russians
made a Provisional government. This was
the first Russian revolution of 1917 and
it was called as the March Revolution.
A bigger revolution took place later
in October 1917 and it was not
spontaneous. The liberals and aristocrats
ruled Russia after the abdication of the
Tsar. They decided to continue the War
to save the honour of Russia. The
common people were tired of the
military action and economic shortage
and did not want the War. They began
organising themselves in councils which
were called Soviets. These Soviets of
soldiers, industrial workers and people
in rural areas were united by a group of
Russian Communist party called
Bolsheviks. These groups represented
the common people’s power.
Women in the February Revolution
‘Women workers, often inspired their male
co-workers … At the Lorenz telephone
factory,… Marfa Vasileva almost single
handedly called a successful strike. Already that
morning, in celebration of Women’s Day,
women workers had presented red bows to the
men … Then Marfa Vasileva, a milling machine
operator stopped work and declared an
sudden strike. The workers on the floor were
ready to support her … The foreman informed
the management and sent her a loaf of bread.
She took the bread but refused to go back to
work. The administrator asked her why she
refused to work and she replied, “I cannot be
the only one who is satiated when others are
hungry.” Women workers from another section
of the factory gathered around Marfa in
support and gradually all the other women
ceased working. Soon the men downed their
tools as well and the entire crowd rushed onto
the street.’ SCERT TELANGANA
168 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
Vladimir Lenin (1870-1924)
was the leader of the Bolsheviks.
Bolsheviks were able to get the
support of the Soviets because
they demanded for immediate and
unconditional peace. They also
demanded that all the land should
be nationalized and redistributed
to the peasants. Bolsheviks
wanted control over prices and
nationalisation of all factories and
banks. The Soviets under the
Bolshevik leadership seized
power from the Provisional
Government in OctoberNovember 1917. They
immediately took steps to end the
war and redistributed land. Russia
could not return to complete
peace because a civil war was
started. This war was led by White
armies of Russian monarchists
and anti- communist soldiers with
help from Britain, France, USA
and Japan. They were all defeated
by 1920. The Bolsheviks also
announced the end of the Russian
empire and permitted the various
nations under it to become
independent. However, gradually
most of the nations that came
under the empire of the Tsar
agreed to join the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics (USSR) which
was set up by the Soviet
government of Russia in 1922.
The October Revolution and the Russian
Countryside: Two Views
1) ‘News of the revolutionary uprising of October
25, 1917, reached the village the following day and
was greeted with enthusiasm; to the peasants it
meant free land and an end to the war. ...The day the
news arrived, the landowner’s house was looted, his
stock farms were “requisitioned” and his vast orchard
was cut down and sold to the peasants for wood; all
his far buildings were torn down and left in ruins
while the land was distributed among the peasants
who were prepared to live the new Soviet life’. From:
Fedor Belov, The History of a Soviet Collective Farm
2) A member of a landowning family wrote to a
relative about what happened at the estate:
‘The “coup” happened quite painlessly, quietly and
peacefully. …The first days were unbearable.. Mikhail
Mikhailovich [the estate owner] was calm...The girls
also…I must say the chairman behaves correctly and
even politely. We were left two cows and two horses.
The servants tell them all the time not to bother us.
“Let them live. We vouch for their safety and property.
We want them treated as humanely as possible….”
…There are rumours that several villages are trying
to evict the committees and return the estate to
Mikhail Mikhailovich. I don’t know if this will happen,
or if it’s good for us. But we rejoice that there is a
conscience in our people...’
From: Serge Schmemann, Echoes of a Native Land. Two Centuries
of a Russian Village (1997).
Read the two views on the revolution in the
countryside. Imagine yourself to be a
witness to the events. Write a short account
from the standpoint of: 1) an owner of an
SCERT
estate 2) a small peasant 3) a journalist.
TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 169
This started a great experiment of building a country without exploiters like
feudal lords, Kings or capitalists. The USSR tried to build a society that was
industrialised and modern and yet did not have inequality or exclusion of people on
the basis of birth, gender, language, etc.
Rise of Stalin
After the death of Lenin in 1924, Stalin emerged as the leader of the Communist
party. Over the next decades, he established his absolute control and put an end to
all opposition. He used his undisputed power to build the economy of USSR. USSR
began a programme of planned economic development (with its Five Year Plans) in
1928.This programme had a twin policy of fast industrialisation and collectivisation
of agriculture.
Impact of Russian Revolution on the world
The experience of the USSR inspired people all over the world especially those
who were committed to the ideals of equality and national liberation. These people
Rabindranath Tagore wrote from
Russia in 1930
‘Moscow appears much less clean
than the other European capitals. None
of those hurrying along the streets look
smart. The whole place belongs to the
workers … Here the masses have not in
the least been put in the shade by the
gentlemen … those who lived in the background for ages have come forward in the
open today … I thought of the peasants
and workers in my own country. It all
seemed like the work of the Genii in the
Arabian Nights. [here] only a decade ago
they were as illiterate, helpless and hungry as our own masses … Who could be
more astonished than an unfortunate
Indian like myself to see how they had
removed the mountain of ignorance and
helplessness in these few years’.
Central Asia of the October
Revolution: Views
M. N. Roy played an important role in
‘comintern’ an international organisation
set to promote communist revolution in
the world. He was in Central Asia at the
time of the civil war in the 1920s. He wrote:
‘The chieftain was a benevolent old
man; his attendant … a youth who … spoke
Russian … He had heard of the Revolution,
which had overthrown the Tsar and driven
away the Generals who conquered the
homeland of the Kirgiz. So, the Revolution
meant that the Kirgiz were masters of their
home again. “Long Live the Revolution”
shouted the Kirgiz youth who seemed to
be a born Bolshevik. The whole tribe
joined.’
M.N.Roy, Memoirs (1964).
SCERT TELANGANA
170 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
Do a brief assessment of the Soviet
experiment. How far was it successful
in building a world based on equality,
freedom and prosperity?
Do you think it is justified to execute
thousands of people for the sake of
such experiments? Why?
What were the criticisms raised against
communist system?
Fig 12.4 : A New Yorker offers to sell his roadster after
losing his money in the stock market crash.
now became communists and tried for a
communist evolution in their countries. Many
Indian leaders like MN Roy,
RabindranathTagore and Jawaharlal Nehru were
also inspired by it even though they did not
agree with many aspects of communism like
suppression of opposition political parties.
Many people were also horrified by the
violence used by USSR to suppress opposition
and denial of multiparty democracy and freedom in the USSR. George Orwell wrote
his famous satiric novel ‘Animal Farm’ to highlight how the ideals of Russian
Revolution were suffering in USSR.
The Economic Depression–1929-1939
The Economic Depression began around the end of 1929 and lasted almost till
1939 when the Second World War started. During this decade, the economy declined
worldwide because of a decline in demand and fall in prices. Factories were closed
because the demand was low. Since
the goods were manufactured in
limited quantity, the prices increased.
Because of expensive goods,
people’s purchasing power reduced.
So the demand for goods further went
down. This cyclical effect caused
massive unemployment. The real
incomes of ordinary people as well
as governments across the world also
declined. Initially a stock market
collapsed in the US, but very soon it
affected almost every country.
In America, as many as 25% people and nearly 33% people in many other
countries were unemployed. As factories closed down and trade declined, cities
became centers of decline. This led to reduced prices (up to 60%) for agricultural
produce causing pauperisation of millions of farmers and stopping of cultivation.
This was the longest and worst economic decline faced by modern economy till
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 171
Fig 12.5: Famous photograph
of Polish immigrant Florence
Owens during Depression by
Dorothea Lange. It depicts
destitute pea pickers in
California, March 1936. What
would she be thinking?
today. The consequences of this were devastating. There was increasing poverty,
desolation, homelessness etc.
Economists and politicians have discussed the causes of this decline, ways to
get over it and possible ways of preventing it from happening again. Marxist
economists argued that this kind of crises happened because of capitalism. They
also thought that it could be prevented by the establishment of socialism. On the
other hand, economists like JM Keynes argued that the state is responsible to keep
the economy going. If it fails to do so, it can lead to situations of depression. Keynes
argued that during economic decline, when demand decreases, the state should invest
funds and generate employment which will help people to earn money and demand
goods in the market. This generation of demand through state action will help the
economy to revive.
Franklin Roosevelt, who became the President of US,
announced “the New Deal” which promised Relief to the
victims of depression, Reform of financial institutions and
steps to ensure economic Recovery (The Three Rs) by
undertaking large public works. However, when the war
started, state expenditure on armies and armaments suddenly
increased. This increased the factory production and demand
for farm produce. He also introduced the much needed
social security system in the US. It established a permanent
system of universal retirement pensions (Social Security),
and unemployment insurance. It also gave welfare benefits
for the handicapped and needy children in families without
fathers. It established the framework for the U.S. welfare
system. In fact, Great Britain had taken the lead in this
direction even before the Depression when the war was still on. These basically
consisted of unemployment insurance and old age pension schemes. Towards the
end of the Second World War, Britain also adopted many social security measures
like unemployment doles, sickness coverage, health schemes, child care etc. All
this made up the idea of a Welfare State, a state which ensured a basic minimum
dignified life for all citizens. It also took care of their most elementary needs like
food, housing, health, child and old age care and education. The state had taken on
the responsibility of providing employment to the able bodied citizens. In this way,
the state tried to reduce the effects of the ups and downs of market based capitalism.
SCERT TELANGANA
172 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
Imagine yourself to be a worker who lost
his job suddenly and has no employment for
the next few years. Write an account of a
day in your life in first person.
Imagine yourself to be a farmer who finds
that the price of his crop has fallen to less
than half. Write your reflection (in three
hundred words).
What aspects of the Welfare State do you
find functioning in India today?
Economic Depression in Germany
German economy faced severe crisis after the war. It was under the burden of
paying war damages etc. The German Government began to print currency notes
on a large scale and this resulted in excessive inflation. It is said that people had
to carry currency in carts to buy one loaf of bread!
The German economy was the worst hit by the Depression. By 1932, industrial
production was reduced to 40 per cent of its 1929 level. Workers lost their jobs
or were paid reduced wages. More than 6 million people were unemployed. On
the streets of Germany, you could see men with placards around their necks saying,
‘Willing to do any work’. Unemployed youths played cards or simply sat at street
corners, or desperately queued up at the local employment exchange. As there
were very few jobs, the youth took to criminal activities and there was total despair
in society.
The economic crisis created deep anxieties and fears in people. The savings
of middle classes, especially salaried employees and pensioners, diminished when
the currency lost its value. Small businessmen, the self-employed and retailers
suffered losses as their businesses got ruined. These sections of society were
filled with the fear of pauperisation, an anxiety of being reduced to the categories
of the working class, or worse still, the unemployed. Only organised workers could
manage to survive themselves and their families. But unemployment reduced their
bargaining power. Big businesses
were in a crisis. The large
peasant population was affected
by a sharp fall in agricultural
prices. Women were unable to fill
their children’s stomachs. So
they were filled with a sense of
deep despair. This caused
political instability as
government after government
failed and could not provide a
stable rule.
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 173
Rise of Fascism, Nazism
 Fascism was one ideology which developed in the period after the First World
War, especially in the defeated countries. It emphasised the idea of national unity
in order to expand and win over other nations. Fascists didn’t allow anyone to
conflict nor have different interests within the nation. They suppressed people
with force in order to ensure absolute loyalty and obedience to a central power.
They were against both communism and liberalism. Fascists wanted to build unity
in their nations through a dictatorial state that promoted the mass mobilization of
the majority community of the nation. Fascist movements shared certain common
features, like the worshipping of the state, a devotion to a strong leader like Hitler,
and an emphasis on extreme nationalism and military conquest. Fascism used
political violence, war, and conquest as a means to achieve national revival. It also
asserted that stronger nations have the right, and indeed a duty, to expand their
territory by displacing weaker nations. It stood for state controlled capitalism and
opposed socialism and communism. It also stood for abolition of all private
industries.
This ideology was more popular in the defeated countries who were feeling
insulted because of the conditions imposed on them by the Versailles treaty and
the pressure of world-wide depression. It first began with the victory of Benito
Mussolini in Italy in 1922; then Hitler and his Nazi Party came to power in Germany
in 1933; General Franco came to power in Spain after a long military campaign
against the democratic state in 1939; meanwhile Japan is also developed its own
version of Fascist ideology i.e. militarism and started its military campaigns in
China, Korea etc. All these dictators were, in some ways, followers of the Fascist
ideology.
Hitler was a powerful speaker. His passion and his words moved many people.
He promised to build a strong nation, undo the injustice of the Versailles Treaty
and restore the dignity of the German people. He promised employment for those
looking for work, and a secure future for the youth. He promised to remove all
foreign influences and fight all foreign ‘conspiracies’ against Germany.
Hitler devised a new style of politics. He understood the importance of rituals
and spectacle to mobilise the masses. Nazis held massive rallies and public meetings
to demonstrate the support for Hitler and create a sense of unity among the people.
The Red banners with the Swastika, the Nazi salute, and the ritual rounds of applause
SCERT TELANGANA
174 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
after the speeches were all part of this
display of power. Hitler mobilized his
supporters by promising to establish the
racial supremacy of Aryans (Germans) over
the world. He also targeted minority
communities like Jews as the main cause of
all problems. He also attacked Communism
and Capitalism terming both of them as
Jewish conspiracies. He promised to build
a strong state which would fight with both
of them. He appealed especially to the
middle class who felt threatened by
capitalism and the Great Depression. Hitler
was also opposed to working class
movement led by the Communists and
Socialists.
In such a situation, Nazi Party’s propaganda gave some hopes of a better future.
Hitler was the unquestioned leader of the Nazi party. In 1928, the Nazi Party had
got less than 2. 6 per cent votes in the Reichstag – the lower house of the German
parliament. But by 1932, it had become the largest party in Germany with 37 per
cent votes.
Hitler came to power and
immediately took steps to establish
an undemocratic and autocratic
rule. He stopped the working of all
democratic institutions like
Parliament. This included arbitrary
arrest of political opponents,
especially the Communists and
putting them in concentration
camps.
From Hitler’s speech
Hitler argued that it is the right of the
most powerful race to conquer the world;
‘For this earth is not allotted to anyone nor is it presented to anyone as a gift.
It is awarded by providence to people who
in their hearts have the courage to conquer
it, the strength to preserve it, and the industry to put it to the plough… The primary
right of this world is the right to life, so far
as one possesses the strength for this.
Hence on the basis of this right a vigorous
nation will always find ways of adapting its
territory to its population size.
Fig 12.6 : Jewish slave labourers in the Buchenwald
concentration camp near Jena Germany in 1945
Is Hitler’s idea of World conquest
correct? Do you think that the world
should belong to those who have power
and strength alone?
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 175
Do you agree with the view that
women should confine themselves to
pain and suffering of bringing up the
children?
Do you think men and women can
participate equally in all aspects of life
including child rearing and work in
factories, offices, and fields?
Fig 12.7: Women accused of protecting Jews
being publicly punished.
Indoctrination
Nazis tried to teach their children right from the beginning in only one way of thinking.
Nazi ideology of racial superiority of Germany and the greatness of Hitler and hatred for
Jews and other people. How was this done?
All boys between the ages of six and ten went through a preliminary training in Nazi
ideology. At the end of the training they had to take the following oath of loyalty to
Hitler: ‘In the presence of this blood banner which represents our Fuhrer I swear to
devote all my energies and my strength to the saviour of our country, Adolf Hitler. I am
willing and ready to give up my life for him, so help me God.’
From W. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich
Robert Lay, head of the German Labour Front, said:
‘We start when the child is three years old. As soon as he even starts to think, he is
given a little flag to wave. Then comes school, the Hitler Youth, military service. But
when all this is over, we don’t let go of anyone. The labour front takes hold of them,
and keeps hold until they go to the grave, whether they like it or not.’
Women under Nazis
In an address to women at the Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September 1934, Hitler said:
We do not consider it correct for the woman to interfere in the world of the man, in
his main sphere. We consider it natural that these two worlds remain distinct…What
the man gives in courage on the battlefield, the woman gives in eternal self-sacrifice, in
eternal pain and suffering. Every child that women bring to the world is a battle, a
battle waged for the existence of her people.
Hitler at the Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September 1934, also said:
‘The woman is the most stable element in the preservation of a folk…she has the
most unerring sense of everything that is important to not let a race disappear because it is her children who would be affected by all this suffering in the first place…That
is why we have integrated the woman in the struggle of the racial community just as
nature and providence have determined so.’ SCERT TELANGANA
176 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
Nazi ideology depended on majoritarian
principles. Jews were merely 0.75 percent of
the population in Germany. Apart from Jews
others who opposed Nazi’s were also punished.
How does the pastor capture this in above peom?
On 3rd March 1933, the
famous Enabling Act was passed.
This Act established dictatorship in
Germany. It gave Hitler all powers
to sideline Parliament and rule by
his order. All political parties and
trade unions were banned except
for the Nazi Party and its affiliates.
The state established complete
control over the economy, media,
army and judiciary.
Special surveillance and
security forces were created to
control and order society in ways
that the Nazis wanted. Apart from
the already existing regular police
in green uniform and the SA or the
Storm Troopers, they also formed
the Gestapo (secret state police),
the SS (the protection squads),
criminal police and the Security
Service (SD). These extraconstitutional powers of these
newly organised forces gave the Nazi state its reputation as the most dreaded
criminal state. Gestapo had the authority to stop and detain people to torture
chambers, round up and send them to concentration camps. They could also deport
anyone at will or arrest people without any legal procedures. The police forces
acquired complete powers to rule. These powers were used to arrest and torture
millions of political activists, trade unionists and people of minority communities,
especially the Jews. They did all this to build a state of horror and fear.
Hitler assigned the responsibility of economic recovery to the economist
Hjalmar Schacht. Schacht aimed at full production and full employment through a
state-funded work-creation programme. This project produced the famous German
superhighways and the people’s car, the Volkswagen. There was an improvement of
Resistance
Pastor Niemoeller, a resistance fighter, observed
an absence of protest, an uncanny silence, amongst
ordinary Germans in the face of brutal and organised
crimes committed against people in the Nazi empire.
He wrote movingly about this silence:
‘First they came for the Communists,
Well, I was not a Communist
So I said nothing.
Then they came for the Social Democrats,
Well, I was not a Social Democrat
So I did nothing,
Then they came for the trade unionists,
But I was not a trade unionist.
And then they came for the Jews,
But I was not a Jew – so I did little.
Then when they came for me,
There was no one left who could stand up for me.’
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 177
Fig 12.8: A cartoon
depicting Hitler as man of
peace as well as man of war.
living standards of a section of the Germans. This period
also created sub-human conditions of life for those who
were tortured by the racist regime. This was also followed
by heavy investment in armament industry to create further
employment. But this plan could be sustained only by going
on war with the neighbours. For this, Hitler followed an
aggressive foreign policy to recover the territories lost by
Germany after the First World War. Then by 1939, he
attacked Poland and as we saw earlier, this started off the
Second World War.
As the War proceeded, the Nazi regime started its
horrible programme of building the racial supremacy of
Germans by mass killings of minority communities.
Hungary (November 1940
confederated) Romania
(November 1940 confederated) Bulgaria (March 1941
confederated)
Yugoslavia (April 1941
German) Greece (April 1941
Italian) Crete (May 1941
German)
Finland (June 1941
confederated)
Soviet Union
Allied
The German Empire,
confederated and occupied
territories.
Map : 1 The German Empire during World War II
SCERT TELANGANA
178 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
In what ways was the Second World
War a logical outcome of Hitler’s
ideology and economic policies?
Find out more about “Holocaust” and
Auschwitz camps and prepare a
project report based on it.
Under the shadow of the Second World War, Germany had started a genocidal
war. In this war, the mass murder of selected groups of innocent civilians of Europe
took place. The number of people killed included: about 60,000,000 Jews,
2,000,000 Gypsies, 10,000,000 Polish civilians, 70,000 Germans who were
considered mentally and physically disabled
besides innumerable political opponents or
people of different religious faith. Nazis
devised a horrifying means of killing
people. They killed thousands of people in
gas chambers in various killing centers like
Auschwitz.
Second World War – 1939-1945
Aggressive nationalism, militarism, imperialism, secret alliances were the
reasons for the second world also. Along with these, the special contexts for the
second world war were the following.
The Treaty of Versailles- Intensity of the terms
At the end of World War I, the Conference on Peace took place in Versailles in
1919. This was the biggest conference of that time as it was attended by delegations
from 32 nations that covered three-fourths of the population of the world. The five
victorious powerful countries of the time, viz. USA, UK, France, Italy and Japan,
participated in this conference. But Socialist Russia and the defeated powers, for
example, Germany, Austria and Turkey, were not invited to the Conference. To
weaken Germany, the Treaty of Versailles imposed some territorial penalties and
military cuts on it. Firstly, Germany was asked to return its colonies in Africa
occupied in the 1880s and European areas like Alsace and Lorraine which they had
occupied from France in 1871. Secondly, it was asked to pull down its army strength
to 100,000 from 900,000 during World War I. It was also asked not to have
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 179
submarines and restrict its naval strength to six battleships of less than 10,000
tonnes and a dozen torpedo missiles carriers and destroyers. It is not surprising,
therefore, that Germans thought the Treaty at Versailles was a diktat imposed on
them and they had no respect or responsibility for it.
Failure of The League of Nations
The Treaty of Versailles also set up the League of Nations to prevent wars in
the future. Neither Russia nor Germany was invited to become members of the
League. USA could not become a member as the US Congress (parliament) refused
to sanction President Woodrow Wilson’s proposal even though he was very active
in the formation of the League. Hence, the League had only 58 members. These
countries hoped that the League would help remove wars through ‘collective
security’ and settle disputes and problems between countries through negotiation.
An International Court of Justice was established by the league of nations to settle
the legal disputes between nations.
Even though it showed a lot of promise and much was expected of it, it eventually
failed to prevent Germany, Japan and Italy from violating international agreements
and attacking other countries.
German challenge to vengeful domination
After Germany’s defeat at the end of the First World War in 1919, the victorious
Allies wanted to punish Germany for starting the war and cripple it so that it could
not rise again. For Germany, the conditions forced on them by the Treaty of
Versailles were slavish. This created an aversive desire in Germany which led to
the rise of Hitler and his Nazi party. They wanted to get back the territories lost by
them in the Treaty of Versailles. They also wanted to restore German control over
Central Europe and end the restrictions on German arms. Germany rebuilt its
industries under the Nazis and developed a massive army and armament industry
which could only be served by a war.
Fear from Socialism and Russia
The disastrous results of the First World War caused great social changes all
SCERT TELANGANA
180 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
over Europe. The working class turned to ideologies of Socialism and
Communism. In Russia, a revolution took place in 1917 because of which Russia
became a Communist state. Russia became Union of Soviet Socialist States
(USSR) in 1922. One of the first acts of the new government was to end Russia’s
participation in the War and begin peace negotiations. The western capitalist
countries like Britain were afraid that similar revolutions would start in other
countries of Europe. So they encouraged Hitler and the Nazis to come together
against USSR. This was the policy of ‘appeasement’ of Hitler. They wanted to
please Hitler to get his support against USSR.
Immediate cause
The immediate provocation for World War II was when the German Army
entered Poland on September 1, 1939. Hitler, the dictator of Germany, invaded
Poland as a punishment for refusing to handover the port of Danzig to Germany.
Hitler thought that the takeover of Poland would be a small military operation.
But Poland had a defence pact with Britain. So, Britain joined the Polish side and
France also joined them a day later. This marked the beginning of World War II.
As most of the Fascist countries supported each other and began military
conquest of neighbouring countries, this led to the Second World War between
the Axis Powers led by Germany, Italy and Japan on the one side and the Allied
Powers led by England, US, France and USSR. In 1941, Japan, an ally of Germany
attacked Pearl Harbour of USA. Hitler decided to attack USSR in 1942. With
this, USA and USSR joined the war against Germany and Japan.
The Defeat and The End
The initial victories of the German armies were turned back after they were
defeated in the famous Battle of Stalingrad in early 1943. People all over Eastern
Europe welcomed Soviet forces as the liberators from the hated Nazi rule. They
eventually captured Berlin, the capital of Germany. Hitler and his close associates
committed suicide to avoid being captured and tried. Eventually Germany was
divided into two parts: the eastern part was named German Democratic Republic
(GDR) and the western portion was named Federal Republic of Germany (FRG).
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 181
The GDR came under the area of influence of USSR while the FRG came under
the influence of USA.
In the far-East, Japan surrendered to USA after the bombing of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki. With this, the second world war ended in August 1945. US armies
occupied Japan but allowed the Japanese Emperor to continue to rule. But Japan
built a Constitutional Monarchy like England. Japan was to be ruled by the elected
government responsible to the parliament (DIET).
Many of the Nazi generals and leaders were captured and put to trial in the
famous Nuremberg trials. The Nuremberg Tribunal sentenced only eleven leading
Nazis to death. Many others were imprisoned for life. Although justice happened,
yet the punishment given to the Nazis was very little as compared to the brutality
Map 2 : Area Under Japanese Contorl 1942 SCERT TELANGANA
182 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
Discuss the nuclear bombing on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and the horrors
of a nuclear war. Do you think such
weapons should be used even against a
facist enemy country?
and extent of their crimes. The Allies did not want to be as harsh on defeated
Germany as they had been after the First World War. In fact, given the economic
collapse of Germany and Japan after the war, the USA came up with Marshall Plan
to fund the economic revival of the two countries. Likewise, the USSR came up
with a package for the revival of East European countries.
Consequences of the World Wars
The World Wars had a long lasting
impact on the politics, society and
economy of the world. These can be listed
as follows.
The first half of the 20th century
ended with the nightmare of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Hopes were also generated
by the establishment of the UNO. Just as the First World War saw the end of large
monarchic empires, the Second World War saw the end of large colonial empires
of the Britain, France, Japan, Italy and Germany. By 1950, countries like India,
China, Indonesia, Vietnam, Egypt, Nigeria etc became independent. Britain, which
was the most powerful country before the war, now became a secondary power.
Two new super powers emerged on the world scene, – the USSR and the USA. The
USSR which faced enormous destruction and losses from Hitler’s war, gradually
rebuilt its economy. Its victory, however, greatly increased its prestige in the world.
Fig 12.10: (Above) Atom Bomb in Nagasaki. The city of Nagasaki before and after the bomb.
SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 183
It was now joined by the entire Eastern Europe and China to form a large ‘Socialist Camp’.
Enormous human cost
The first consequence of the two World Wars was widespread deaths and injuries. As
stated earlier, almost 10 million people were killed in the First(they included about 75,000
Indian soliders who fought in Africa and Europe on the British side) and 20 to 25 million in
the Second World War. Most of those who died were men and almost all of them were
under forty years of age. A deadly race of arms and weapons, particularly nuclear and
chemical weapons, started after
the World Wars. The world is
still constantly living under the
threat of total destruction of all
life through even an accidental
use of such weapons.
Democratic principles
asserted
The world had understood the
dangers of undemocratic
government after the two wars.
This led to an increasing need for
democracy. With the First World
War, several empires also ended
(For example, the Austro
Hungarian Empire, the Russian
Empire, the Ottoman Empire,
and the German Empire etc). In
countries like Russia occured a
socialist revolution while
countries like Germany
overthrew monarchy and became
Republics. The Ottoman Empire was replaced by a democratic and secular state in Turkey.
Similarly, during the First World War, colonies became self governing. After World War II,
the colonies got their independence and several new countries were born across Asia and
Africa.
War related deaths 1500 - 1999 CE (Common Era)
Source: Lesser RB et al State of the World 1999 A World
Watch report on Progress towards a Sustainable Society
(London Earthscan publication, 1999).
The last column tells us the proportionate
deaths due to wars – the number of war deaths
for every thousand people who lived during
those centuries. Thus, less than four people out
of a thousand died in the 16th century while it
rose to more than 44 persons in the 20th century – nearly 4.5% people! SCERT TELANGANA
184 Social Studies The World During the World Wars
1. Industrial capitalism 2. Nazism 3. Aggressive nationalism
4. Militarism 5. Fascism 6.Imperialism
7. Socialism 8.Communism 9. Revolution
10. Centralisation of power 11. Bolshevik
Keywords
Change in balance of power
With World War I, the German, Austro- Hungarian, Russian and Turkish empires
came to an end. The map of eastern and central Europe was redrawn on the basis of
nationality, economic viability and military security. When World War II came to
an end, the map of the world changed yet again as ex-colonies became independent
nations.
Enfranchisement of women
After a long struggle for political right like right to vote, British women got
these rights in 1918. In the long lasting wars like the World Wars, industrial
production and other services are necessary. Because men were in the battle fields,
more women had to work in factories, shops, offices, voluntary services, hospitals
and schools. With the new confidence of becoming bread-winners, women began
raising their voices for equality in all walks of life. Getting the right to vote was a
big step in that direction.
New International organisations
The United Nations Organisation (UNO) was established after World War II.
UN is a kind of world government based on four principles, viz. preserving peace,
upholding human rights, respecting international law and promoting social progress.
It works through agencies like UNICEF, UNESCO, WHO, ILO, etc. The UNO,
despite being accused of becoming a tool of the great powers like USA, and Russia
(USSR) has managed to prevent wars and maintain peace and stability. We learn
more about UNO and how it worked in 19th chapter in detail. SCERT TELANGANA
Free distribution by T.S. Government 2019-20 185
Improve your learning
1. Make a table to show allies, axis and central powers, participated with
following countries on different sides of the world wars: Austria, USSR
(Russia), Germany, Britain, Japan, France, Italy, USA. (AS3
)
2. How did the idea of nation states and nationalism influence desire for war
during World Wars? (AS1
)
3. Write a short note on various causes of two World Wars. Do you think any of
these features are prevalent even today in countries around the world?
How? (AS4
)
4. Russian revolution brought in many changes in their society. What were they?
And what challenges did they face? (AS1
)
5. Compare different points of view about Great Depression, which one would
you agree with? Why? (AS1
)
6. In what ways were Jews persecuted during the Nazi Germany? Do you think
in every country some people are differentiated because of their
identity? (AS4
)
7. List the measures taken under idea of welfare state under Great
Depression. (AS1
)
8. What challenges were faced by Germany during Great Depression and how
did Nazi rulers and Hitler make use of it? (AS1
)
9. Read the para 1 of page 169 i.e; “This started a great experiment ......... language,
etc” and write your opinion on it. (AS2
)
10. Observe the map-2 of page 181 and answer the following questions. (AS5
)
i) Mention any two countries which are not under the control of Japan.
ii) Mention any two countries which are under the control of Japan and lying
on its western side.
11. Locate the following in the map of the world. (AS5
)
i) Germany ii) Italy iii) Austria iv) U.S.A. v) China vi) Russia
 vii) Britain
12. Prepare a few slogans on the prevention of wars and promotion of
peace. (AS6
)
Discussion: SCERT
Discuss the family conditions of war victims and their sufferings in classroom.